[Amit Varma]: There are terms we take for granted that perhaps we need to look at closely. One of them is
[Amit Varma]: art. What is art? How do we define it? Can art only be done by those who have been deemed
[Amit Varma]: by elites and academics to be artists? Or can anyone do art? Is a five year old kid
[Amit Varma]: drawing an upside down house and a pink moon creating art? As a guide to thinking about
[Amit Varma]: this, I recommend an excellent book by Ernst Gombrich, The Story of Art, which begins with
[Amit Varma]: these words, quote, There really is no such thing as art. There are only artists. Once
[Amit Varma]: these were men who took colored earth and roughed out the forms of a bison on the walls
[Amit Varma]: of a cave. Today they buy their paints and design posters for the underground. They did
[Amit Varma]: many things in between. There is no harm in calling all these activities art, as long
[Amit Varma]: as we keep in mind that such a word may mean very different things in different times and
[Amit Varma]: places. And as long as we realize that art with a capital A has no existence. For art
[Amit Varma]: with a capital A has come to be something of a bogey and a fetish. You may crush an
[Amit Varma]: artist by telling him that what he has just done may be quite good in its own way, only
[Amit Varma]: it is not art. And you may confound anyone enjoying a picture by declaring that what
[Amit Varma]: he liked in it was not the art, but something different. Stop quote. I agree with Gombrich.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm glad that we are finally achieving a world in which a small group of elite gatekeepers
[Amit Varma]: and tastemakers don't get to decide what is art. To hell with them. We don't need them.
[Amit Varma]: We can all be artists if we want.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. My guest today is Nishant Jain, better known online
[Amit Varma]: as the Sneaky Artist. I first noticed Nishant when he put up these time-lapse videos of
[Amit Varma]: him sketching people in outdoor locations. Later, I realized that's what is known as
[Amit Varma]: urban sketching. Then Nishant signed up for my course, The Art of Clear Writing. And along
[Amit Varma]: with other participants in the course, we have since had many lively discussions on
[Amit Varma]: what constitutes art and what is this thing called the creator economy. Nishant thinks
[Amit Varma]: about this new world in counterintuitive ways that are filled with clarity. He does unconventional
[Amit Varma]: things, but he's thought them through and he's clear about why he's doing them. After
[Amit Varma]: doing my course, he also started a long form conversation podcast where he speaks to artists
[Amit Varma]: like himself. And he began an excellent newsletter where he writes about his journey, thinking
[Amit Varma]: aloud in a sense for all of us. He lives in Vancouver, but he happened to be in India
[Amit Varma]: in November. So I said, Hey, if you're up for an episode, come to Mumbai. I was kind
[Amit Varma]: of kidding, but he flew down just for this recording. We had so much to talk about that
[Amit Varma]: we crossed five hours and felt we could have spoken for another five. I love this conversation.
[Amit Varma]: But before you begin listening to it, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances are that many of you first
[Amit Varma]: heard of me because of my blog India Uncut, which was active between 2003 and 2009 and
[Amit Varma]: became somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the form gave me. And I feel I
[Amit Varma]: was shaped by it in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced
[Amit Varma]: to think about many different things because I wrote about many different things. Well,
[Amit Varma]: that phase in my life ended for various reasons. And now it is time to revive it. Only now
[Amit Varma]: I'm doing it through a newsletter. I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: where I will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy. I'll write about some of
[Amit Varma]: the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else. So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: and subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land
[Amit Varma]: up in your email inbox. You don't need to go anywhere. So subscribe now for free. The
[Amit Varma]: India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Nishant, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Hi, Amit. Thank you for having me. I'm both excited and terrified at the same time to
[Guest]: be here.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you're a podcaster yourself, you should kind of know this by now that the only
[Amit Varma]: person who has any business feeling terror is a host because a host has to kind of constantly
[Amit Varma]: be alert and think about where to take the conversation left when to interject all of
[Amit Varma]: that. Well, you know, guests just chill and they just kind of chat about stuff. But since
[Amit Varma]: you are so terrified, let me ask you a sort of unconventional question, which is that
[Amit Varma]: if say Da Vinci or Rembrandt were alive today, would they do what they were doing? Would
[Amit Varma]: their art be what it was then? Or would they go off into different directions?
[Guest]: That's a really good question. Because what often happens I feel is that when people look
[Guest]: back at the art of people they admire, they sort of transpose them to the current moment
[Guest]: doing that same thing. So somebody looks at Rembrandt and decides they want to be a fine
[Guest]: artist. But Rembrandt was a fine artist of his time and they are trying to be a fine
[Guest]: artist in the 21st century using the same tools almost. That's a strange decision in
[Guest]: my in my opinion. So I don't know much about the background of these people and how they
[Guest]: came to be artists, whether they went through formal education, but they were alive in a
[Guest]: time of great discovery. And they were leaders of various movements, artistic visions and
[Guest]: ideas. So how I would like to think of it is that they would be using all the technologies
[Guest]: they could because that's what they did. Then people used technologies like camera obscura
[Guest]: as soon as those were available to them too much criticism, that this is not real art.
[Guest]: And a lot of great artists have faced this criticism in their time that what they are
[Guest]: doing is not real art. And it is only in retrospect centuries later that we are looking at their
[Guest]: work and now giving it the title of real art and trying to imitate that in the same way
[Guest]: today. So I feel like somebody like Da Vinci for sure would have a TikTok channel. And
[Guest]: you would see you would see NFTs from a number of them and all kinds of because these are
[Guest]: people excited by the future. So I had a guest in on my podcast sometime back and we were
[Guest]: talking about we were talking about the things that people make as subjects. So I speak to
[Guest]: urban sketches on my podcast. And one of my consistent questions to them comes from the
[Guest]: fact that urban sketches come from a very diverse set of backgrounds. Anybody is an
[Guest]: urban sketcher, if they simply take a sketchbook, and they walk around that town and they draw.
[Guest]: So I'm always curious to know, what is it that makes you draw? What about your city
[Guest]: do you look at that gets you interested? So what are the subjects that excite you? And
[Guest]: why? And this is something I tried to find out through these conversations I have, he
[Guest]: broached the subject of Rembrandt and Van Gogh. And the idea was that these guys painted
[Guest]: landscapes and rural landscapes and windmills and things like this, we might look at that.
[Guest]: And inculcate a romantic notion of pastoral rural life and think that this is what we
[Guest]: should do. Real artists paint windmills and old buildings and that's what we should do.
[Guest]: But windmills were the latest technology of Rembrandt's time. The farming scenes that
[Guest]: Van Gogh was painting were happening outside his home. This was modern life for him. So
[Guest]: somebody like Rembrandt painting windmills is like someone like me going to Silicon Valley
[Guest]: and making a drawing of Googleplex, or finding Elon Musk and drawing a portrait of Elon Musk
[Guest]: and not of some other thing which is informed by an aesthetic that is two centuries or three
[Guest]: centuries old. So it's kind of difficult to think about what someone would precisely do.
[Guest]: But the easier route is to think about the motivations that they had in the time that
[Guest]: they were alive, and how those motivations can be the same for us today in the time that
[Amit Varma]: we are alive. That's a great point. So I have a couple of
[Amit Varma]: related thoughts. I'll just voice them and tell me what you feel about them. And thought
[Amit Varma]: number one is this, that the population of Warsaw today is probably more than all of
[Amit Varma]: Europe at the time Da Vinci was alive. And therefore, just looking at it in a crude statistical
[Amit Varma]: way, you would assume that the distribution of artistic talent is as much if not even
[Amit Varma]: better. And I say better because you have much more exposure to art, you have that entire
[Amit Varma]: body of centuries of art, which you can look back on and learn from, if not consciously,
[Amit Varma]: then at least sort of imbibe it without realizing. And also we have far better technology available
[Amit Varma]: to us. So my assumption would be that in a modern times, with so many more people, which
[Amit Varma]: by the way, is a bloody good thing. Population is not a problem. It's a greater strength
[Amit Varma]: that in these modern times, with so many more people, with so much better technology, with
[Amit Varma]: so much better exposure to art, my assumption would simply be that we should get art of
[Amit Varma]: a much higher quality than in days past. And I think this is happening, but I think it
[Amit Varma]: is happening in ways that are unseen by us. I think that what is most likely happening
[Amit Varma]: is that we are so inundated by all kinds of music and sound and visuals and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: that a lot of stuff just falls by the wayside, that there is a great danger today to be lost
[Amit Varma]: and perhaps lost forever. Like I remember there was this thread on Twitter a while back,
[Amit Varma]: which I think Roshan Abbas had pointed me to, which was about Billy Joel, that when
[Amit Varma]: Billy Joel's Piano Man came out, it sank basically, and the record label was just not going to
[Amit Varma]: print anymore. And it was a done thing and he wasn't going to do any more records and
[Amit Varma]: that's it, the guy was over. Till one random enthusiast decided that no, this is such
[Amit Varma]: an amazing album, it has to be heard. And he himself took it around to all the radio
[Amit Varma]: stations saying that please play this, which in the early 70s was how you made a mark by
[Amit Varma]: being played at a radio station. And finally, he made the deal with the RJ of a big radio
[Amit Varma]: station that there was some kind of quid pro quo, but basically, I'll give you something
[Amit Varma]: that you want if you kind of play this and that guy played it. And you know, what happened,
[Amit Varma]: happened. And similarly, I remember this old video by Rick Beato, the music YouTuber, where
[Amit Varma]: he talks about how during his lifetime, Bach was unknown. You know, he was a marginal figure.
[Amit Varma]: And then in the decades after his death, you had this kind of Bach Renaissance and today
[Amit Varma]: he's a great figure he is. And the truth is that number one, there are possibly many people
[Amit Varma]: like that today we don't recognize, but future generations might. But also that there is
[Amit Varma]: a danger that a lot of people are A, getting lost, and B, that we aren't adequately appreciative
[Amit Varma]: of the quality of art out there that we're looking at past centuries. And of course,
[Amit Varma]: we should admire pioneers of the past, like Da Vinci and Rembrandt for everything they
[Amit Varma]: did and everything they stood for. But we are probably closing our eyes to a lot of
[Amit Varma]: incredible art that is already out there. And some of us may even be sort of looking
[Amit Varma]: down on it with this knobbish thing, that this is not on the canvas, therefore it is
[Amit Varma]: not art. Looking down on new media, like for example, TikTok, if there is a Da Vinci on
[Amit Varma]: TikTok today, obviously, he's not being regarded as a Da Vinci of TikTok, which is sad.
[Guest]: Well, the question of regarded implies who is doing the regarding. So this is the great
[Guest]: liberation of today, right? Like, when we think of Da Vinci's time, or we think even
[Guest]: 50, 60 years back, let's say, there is a certain group of people who have the privilege
[Guest]: to be able to regard and then give value to someone's art. They own galleries, or they
[Guest]: own auction houses, and they get to decide, okay, art and okay now, and therefore you
[Guest]: become an artist. So these people come through the cracks, music industry, all even film
[Guest]: industry, everything, because of those gatekeepers. And gatekeepers is a pejorative term, but
[Guest]: they were, they would see themselves as curators, they are the ones preserving and proliferating
[Guest]: a movement. So it is a very noble job to do none very true. But when you say something
[Guest]: like say, Da Vinci today, on TikTok, today's Da Vinci not being regarded, I would counter
[Guest]: that with saying that there is no need for them to be regarded. Someone like him on and
[Guest]: there are hundreds like him on TikTok. And the beauty of today's time is that we can
[Guest]: find each of those hundreds of people. When I think of the 1600s and 1700s, I think of
[Guest]: how many people perhaps died remaining unknown their whole lives, their paintings lost to
[Guest]: us because the geographic location of where they lived, made getting access to a gallery
[Guest]: difficult, made getting access to an elite patron difficult. If you don't have an elite
[Guest]: patron, your paintings don't last 200 years later for them to be seen, and then to be
[Guest]: discovered again further and put in museums and you to become a name. So there are so
[Guest]: many geniuses who simply by not having the right set of circumstances around their work
[Guest]: could not become big names. And today, all of those things have been shattered in lots
[Guest]: of different ways. Today, it is possible for an artist to be known and to earn the value
[Guest]: of their work in their time. And you don't need to have a situation like Vincent van
[Guest]: Gogh and somebody being appreciated after their death, somebody committing suicide out
[Guest]: of the lack of appreciation for their work. So when we talk about this thing of things
[Guest]: getting drowned, so I always think about music because I have grown around good music. Music
[Guest]: has been a very deep part of my life always. And I have sort of gone backwards in time
[Guest]: in my appreciation of music. I started off when I was a young teenager, I wanted the
[Guest]: music of my time, Green Day was big for me, Bryan Adams was big for me. And every year
[Guest]: since then, I would go another decade back. And until I came to settle on even music from
[Guest]: the 20s and 30s, and like jazz and old blues, and that became my music. And how I think
[Guest]: of it is that somebody might look at my choice of music and say, you don't even listen to
[Guest]: pop music. I have never heard a Taylor Swift song, for example, I wouldn't be able to tell
[Guest]: her voice apart from some of the other big pop stars of today. What does that mean? Does
[Guest]: that mean should I feel that the kind of music I like is being drowned out by the pop music
[Guest]: of today? This again implies that there is one pyramid to climb, and that you have to
[Guest]: be the top of this pyramid, otherwise you are nothing. And this has been true for centuries,
[Guest]: that there is one pyramid or two pyramids, you have to be top of the pops, or you are
[Guest]: nothing. The doors get on this TV show, and they get to perform live or they are nothing.
[Guest]: But that's not the case today, right? Like you can exist within your own ecosystems,
[Guest]: all of these musical genres have their own ecosystems within which they thrive. Jazz
[Guest]: is alive today, there is more incredible jazz today than there was in the 30s, 40s, 50s,
[Guest]: 60s, 70s, 80s, 90s, 2000s. This year has the most jazz. This year has more people appreciating
[Guest]: Bach than ever before in history. This year has more people appreciating Da Vinci than
[Guest]: ever before in history. So our notions of what is being drowned out is, I feel like
[Guest]: it is a function of this old idea that there is one pyramid. And if you are not on the
[Guest]: top of that one pyramid, which is incidentally driven by corporations who want to sell certain
[Guest]: things, and who want to prop up certain musicians, I answer the pop music question by simply
[Guest]: saying pop music is one thin layer on top of what is music. All the music of the whole
[Guest]: world, all the centuries of it is accessible to me today. Why does it matter that I didn't
[Guest]: listen to an album that came out in 2021? What makes it special compared to an album
[Guest]: that came out in 1970 that I also haven't heard that I might be curious about? Because
[Guest]: now I am in my world of discovery, my ecosystem, through which I go to YouTube to access some
[Guest]: of it. I go to Instagram to access my art. I go to another place to access videos and
[Guest]: music and things. Spotify tells me about music from the 30s and 40s, just as it tells me
[Guest]: about music from 2021. So these races, almost, of who is on top is increasingly irrelevant.
[Guest]: It has helped me to think like this as an artist myself, to consider these things as
[Guest]: relevant, because it has helped me to do more work. And it has helped me to make peace as
[Guest]: a creator, this feeling that you are being drowned out by other things, the understanding
[Guest]: that we are not in a single race anymore, as listeners, as readers, and as writers and
[Amit Varma]: as musicians.
[Amit Varma]: That's so well put many different races to run and sort of a sideways sort of angle before
[Amit Varma]: we continue with the line we embarked upon, which is, you know, you mentioned about how
[Amit Varma]: in Da Vinci's time or Rembrandt's time, they are the guys who got lucky enough to get noticed
[Amit Varma]: to find a patron to be geographically in the right place. And there's another aspect of
[Amit Varma]: this, which is, at one level, of course, you're lucky enough to get noticed. So you're noticed.
[Amit Varma]: But at another level, if you're not noticed, what is also happening is you're not iterating,
[Amit Varma]: you're not improving your art, you're not getting better and better. You know, even
[Amit Varma]: canvases are expensive back in the day, somebody who could have been a great artist, never
[Amit Varma]: even gets close to that, because he's not painting enough canvases, because of course.
[Guest]: So there's this artist I really admire, and he died of the Spanish flu almost exactly
[Guest]: 200 years ago, Egon Schiele, and he died in his 20s. And I saw his work in a museum. And
[Guest]: this was the first time that I also read about his life. So it was a chronological collection
[Guest]: of his work next to incidents of his life. And one of those incidents was about how he
[Guest]: went to I think some in the hills of Switzerland, to find a blue color. Wow. There's no art
[Guest]: supply store to go into and get a full palette of colors. You want a particular shade, you
[Guest]: have to source those things from a part of the world where that color is made.
[Amit Varma]: That's insane. You know, this brought to mind, like yesterday, I saw this video of this guy
[Amit Varma]: called Puneet Superstar. Have you heard of Puneet Superstar? I have not. Neither had
[Amit Varma]: I till yesterday. We are recording this in 23rd November, right? Episode will sort of
[Amit Varma]: broadcast later. So Puneet Superstar is this guy who's apparently very big on TikTok and
[Amit Varma]: Instagram and all that. And there was a time where he was putting out guess how many videos
[Amit Varma]: in a day? It's obviously a high number, because I'm asking you but guess.
[Amit Varma]: Three, four? No, keep guessing. Eight?
[Amit Varma]: There was a day he put out 500 videos. Five?
[Amit Varma]: He was just sitting with his phone, turning it on himself, record clip after clip, put
[Amit Varma]: it up, right? Massive volume. He's made more than one and a half lakh videos. He said in
[Amit Varma]: his early days, it was disheartening, because he was getting three, four likes per video.
[Amit Varma]: And his family was like, what are you doing, son? In fact, even one uncle, like he had
[Amit Varma]: called himself, I forget the exact term for it, but basically useless, unemployed, the
[Amit Varma]: Hindi for it. And his uncle had told him, what are you doing? Why don't you see this
[Amit Varma]: thing called TikTok? Why don't you make videos? So he started making videos. And after a week,
[Amit Varma]: his uncle was what the fuck are you doing? You know, what is this? That you're just putting
[Amit Varma]: three likes, two likes per video, probably his own likes, but he continues.
[Amit Varma]: And eventually a video goes viral, which in his terms is like 1500 views. And then he
[Amit Varma]: stays stable at that level. And then he hits another level. And today, apparently, people
[Amit Varma]: pay him to record personalized birthday messages for him. So in a day, he'll do like 30 personalized
[Amit Varma]: birthday messages. And the manner of that, and again, I've seen him speaking about this,
[Amit Varma]: I haven't even seen any of those videos, I'm entering a rabbit hole of Puneet superstar
[Amit Varma]: soon. But apparently, what he does is he'll take a cake, he'll take a separate cake for
[Amit Varma]: each guy. And he'll wish the guy and smash it on his face. So he speaks about the process
[Amit Varma]: of then wiping off all of the previous cake and before he smashes the next cake, 500 cakes
[Amit Varma]: a day, not 500 cakes a day, it must be less than that 15-20 cakes for whoever he wishes
[Amit Varma]: happy birthday to. If they make special requests, he'll give them more. So one guy apparently
[Amit Varma]: said, don't do it with cake, do it with chowmein. And I'll give you 500 bucks more. So then
[Guest]: he went out and bought some chowmein and did it with the chowmein. This is approaching
[Amit Varma]: some sadism territory though. But the guy's making money. It's an interesting way for
[Amit Varma]: a creator. And the thing is, the buggers iterate. Like I keep telling people that quantity
[Amit Varma]: leads to quality, keep doing, keep doing, keep doing. But I'm not sure I would say that
[Guest]: for 500 videos a day. There is a market for this kind of thing, you know, what's happening
[Guest]: is that not only are you creating video content, but you're inviting your viewership to contribute
[Guest]: to the creation. Yeah, you are giving them a reason to talk to you to reply to you. Maybe
[Guest]: if he has a live stream, then they can tell him something to do right then. So a lot of
[Guest]: creative technology, and it's a little controversial to say, but a lot of creative technology and
[Guest]: online individual creator technology benefits from the pornography industry. And that has
[Guest]: given us handicaps that has given us independent micro payments that has given us all these
[Guest]: platforms that Twitch and everything thrives upon. Like the reason why video streams are
[Guest]: possible today is because the there was a market in porn for it. I mean, a lot of the
[Guest]: intimate creator economy is kind of driven by only fans as well. So exactly. And only
[Guest]: fans works on this platform. And it has like it's taken huge leaps since the pandemic because
[Guest]: so many people lost conventional income streams of live streaming things. Well, there are
[Guest]: different degrees of how intimate and how explicit things get. But the fundamental concept
[Guest]: of somebody feeling like they matter, that somebody that they watch on video is responding
[Guest]: to them in a sense, and the value that that has, what's happening now is there is a phase
[Guest]: when ideas are skeuomorphic, not only in format, but even in the mentality of what is the idea,
[Guest]: what is the product, a drawing is a drawing that I sell physically. Otherwise, it is a
[Guest]: drawing that somebody sees digitally. But the idea that the making of the drawing could
[Guest]: be the product. If I live stream a drawing, then people would pay money just to watch
[Guest]: me draw. And people might pay money simply because I live in a part of the world that
[Guest]: they can never otherwise access and actually watch over my shoulder. So the technology
[Guest]: is making possible this interaction between us. And therefore it has value because it
[Guest]: is otherwise impossible. So this is as things evolve, as we get more into it, you get these
[Guest]: very digital native ideas of what is a product and what has value. And it's super interesting.
[Guest]: Like young people are better positioned to do this because they are digital natives.
[Guest]: And I think it's a fan like all creatives, all creators should look at what the youngest
[Guest]: person they can find is doing and apply their creative ideas to making that work in their
[Amit Varma]: favor.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I think, you know, both of us benefit from being at a point where things
[Amit Varma]: have changed in a particular direction. Like, of course, 12 years ago, or more than a decade
[Amit Varma]: ago, Kevin Kelly wrote this great essay 1000 fans. And just to kind of summarize for my
[Amit Varma]: listeners Kelly's thrust there was that artists no longer need to scale like earlier, if you
[Amit Varma]: were a musician, you'd need to be, you know, make it to the top people at the top make
[Amit Varma]: a lot of money, not so much for everybody else. But his point was in the new age artists
[Amit Varma]: will no longer need to scale. If you just find 1000 true fans who are say paying you
[Amit Varma]: $100 a year, that's $100,000 a year, that's that's extremely healthy. And you can get
[Amit Varma]: by on that. And something that both you and I have seen where it's no longer so important
[Amit Varma]: to get into the mainstream, even if there is a mainstream at all, which is why what
[Amit Varma]: you said about the da Vinci of tick tock, not needing that kind of large audience is
[Amit Varma]: absolutely true. He's got 1000 or more likely 100,000 true fans. And that's perfectly fine.
[Amit Varma]: And thinking aloud, it also strikes me that that is not only a fantastic shift from a
[Amit Varma]: creator's point of view. It's also a very interesting shift from the consumer's point
[Amit Varma]: of view, like much as you and I are creators, we're also consumers. And a lot of the stuff
[Amit Varma]: that I consume is stuff that I feel an intimate connection with, like there will be podcasts
[Amit Varma]: I listen to like Russ Roberts doing his thing, or, you know, Tyler Cowen show, or hardcore
[Amit Varma]: history, which is so incredible, where it's not like you're listening to something broadcast
[Amit Varma]: to you, but you actually witnessed you're sitting with a couple of friends, people often
[Amit Varma]: say this about my show, that I felt I was sitting on a sofa and you and your guests
[Amit Varma]: are just sitting and talking and I'm just listening in, which is incredible because
[Amit Varma]: it fosters a sense of intimacy. Like earlier, your artists were at a plane removed from
[Amit Varma]: you, you know, like Amitabh Bachchan had temples made for him. So they were at a plane removed,
[Amit Varma]: they are larger than life. Today, you are so much smaller than that you are life itself,
[Amit Varma]: you're right there, you're next to the guy, you when you if you accidentally meet him,
[Amit Varma]: you feel like you actually know the person which is what many, you know, listeners of
[Amit Varma]: the podcast sometimes tell me, except that they wonder why am I speaking like a retard
[Amit Varma]: at half the speed because they listen at double speed. So that apart, what is your sense of
[Amit Varma]: this of the kind of art you consume and the liberation that this realization must have
[Guest]: brought you?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I grew up in the 90s. And I was 10 years old when I first went on the internet
[Guest]: with the dial up connection and everything. And instantly this opened up a world like
[Guest]: immediately there was the idea that you can have online friendships, there were these
[Guest]: chat rooms and this idea that you can talk to somebody. So you can get something from
[Guest]: somebody that you've never met. And there was no money in these ideas initially. So
[Guest]: I look a little nostalgically back on those times, because what that meant was, because
[Guest]: there is no idea of it being financially feasible or financially profitable. Everything was
[Guest]: sincere. Only somebody who really, really cared about a subject wrote about a subject
[Guest]: there was no incentive to have disinformation, for example, because why what will how will
[Guest]: it help? There's no political angle to it, there's no money to be made. So somebody writing
[Guest]: about history, the only reason they would do it is because they honestly actually love
[Guest]: this subject, or politics or art or whatever. So there was this native sort of niceness
[Guest]: about the internet in its early form in that sense. So what I have often felt is that I
[Guest]: have learned so many things from being on the internet. And what that has done to me
[Guest]: as a consumer of the written word of music of videos, all art and all these things, is
[Guest]: that it has empowered me in so many ways, I would always draw when I was young. But
[Guest]: I used to think that I'm not good at it, because I can't draw from imagination. I was always
[Guest]: even when I was super young, very good at looking at something and drawing. And I used
[Guest]: to think that that is not art. This is copying. I can't draw I can copy. So I would dismiss
[Guest]: my abilities like this and think he moved in India. But so from watching people do this
[Guest]: thing and watching people put out content, which is not that simple idea of this is art,
[Guest]: you know, that singular definition art means a finished painting with all this level of
[Guest]: detail with all this like huge canvas with all these tools and supplies that I will never
[Guest]: own like oil paints and big brushes. So I can't make art. But then I saw this webcomic,
[Guest]: I saw xkcd. And xkcd is this webcomic with just lines and just stick figures. And it
[Guest]: made me feel things it made me feel think about ideas, it made me think about love and
[Guest]: math and science, which are the various subjects that that webcomic is about. And I could see
[Guest]: that it's instantly connecting so easily with me and I am geographically so far away from
[Guest]: this person's world. And so it has to be similarly connecting with so many 1000s of people. And
[Guest]: it's just stick figures. And that was the first time that I distinctly remember that
[Guest]: a piece of content on the internet gave me permission. And this idea of permission is
[Guest]: very dear to my life, because I feel like I have always been a contrarian who does not
[Guest]: seek permission. But even that idea is on the surface, like deep inside, I feel all
[Guest]: of us need permission from various forces in our life to do anything. And we seek it
[Guest]: from peers, we seek it from people who inspire us, let me do something, tell me I can do
[Guest]: something, show me how I can also do something. I saw the stick figure comic and I told myself,
[Guest]: you know, I don't know how to draw, but I can also make a webcomic. And I started to
[Guest]: make a webcomic. And I started to make a webcomic just like xkcd. I would talk about my life
[Guest]: though. But just like him, I would draw three times a week and publish it. And it became
[Guest]: a thing. And I got into this idea that I can put my drawings on the internet, which are
[Guest]: not very good. I don't know how to draw really. But I can be funny about it. Because I've
[Guest]: always been putting writing on the internet. I'd been a blogger for about five years before
[Guest]: then. And this is another thing that I took permission on. There was a Telegraph article
[Guest]: Telegraph in Calcutta, with the title of weblogs, this new thing that has happened. And there
[Guest]: is a blogosphere on the internet. And that reading that gave me the permission to put
[Guest]: my writing online. Hey, I don't need to be any blight and or I don't need to be Arthur
[Guest]: Conan Doyle, I can just write and I get to hit a publish button. What an empowering feeling
[Guest]: that I get to do that. Who am I, I get to do it. I started a weblog, a blog. And I started
[Guest]: blogging religiously. And five years later, I started a webcomic. And I had the right
[Guest]: to do that somebody gave me the permission to do that. And this is what content on the
[Guest]: internet is to me. No matter what I consume, no matter what someone else consumes, whether
[Guest]: you enjoy it or not, it gives you this, it empowers you, you get to appreciate it. And
[Guest]: you know that your appreciation has value to that person who is seeking it from you.
[Guest]: Even the idea that I have the right to appreciate something, who am I to appreciate something
[Guest]: who am I to say that this person is an artist, don't gallery owners get to decide those things.
[Guest]: But now on the internet, I get to decide that my like button matters. If I upload a video
[Guest]: on YouTube, that person becomes a more consistent YouTuber, I help to do that. So it is empowerment
[Guest]: on all ends of the spectrum handed out to every average internet user. It's been just
[Amit Varma]: amazing for me the last 15 years of doing this, the point to make about who is an artist
[Amit Varma]: and this permission that we need is so true, like something that I discussed on an episode
[Amit Varma]: I recorded recently, though I don't know whether it will release before or after this one probably
[Amit Varma]: before and I would have said it is with Annapurna Garimela, the art historian and we were kind
[Amit Varma]: of discussing how, you know, a lot of fine art through the ages, the problem that I have
[Amit Varma]: with it and by fine art, I mean, you know, painted canvases and all of that is that it's
[Amit Varma]: restricted to the elites, you know, you have a bunch of elite gatekeepers at a particular
[Amit Varma]: point in time, who may be in the throes of particular ideologies or beliefs or politics
[Amit Varma]: or whatever, they decide what is good and what is not they decide who is an artist and
[Amit Varma]: who is not they create this distinction between art is this and the rest is craft or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I've actually had artists, fine artists here in India talking to me about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, referring to something a famous critic wrote about their work saying that
[Amit Varma]: I don't know, none of that was in my head when I made it. But he's seen something that's
[Amit Varma]: not there. And and to kind of, you know, get past that elitism to make those gatekeepers
[Amit Varma]: irrelevant is pretty fantastic to me. And just speaking of forms, like I remember, like
[Amit Varma]: I was one of the early bloggers here. And when I started blogging, the great part of
[Amit Varma]: it was that, like I was a mainstream journalist, but it freed me from the necessity of following
[Amit Varma]: the news cycle that you have to write about what is newsworthy. It freed me from dictates
[Amit Varma]: of style, what the house style in a place might be, so I could find my own voice. And
[Amit Varma]: most of all, it freed me from formats, right, you know, the 800 word article, and we used
[Amit Varma]: to think in fixed formats, like a writer would think that an article has to be 800 words,
[Amit Varma]: a book is 100,000 filmmakers would think that all Hollywood film is, you know, 190 minutes
[Amit Varma]: or a Bollywood film is three hours, and you're stuck to those formats. And today, over time,
[Amit Varma]: and even it took even me a while to realize this, even after I had blogged a lot and all
[Amit Varma]: of that, that today, that thinking is outdated. Like you said, skeuomorphic, and skeuomorphic,
[Amit Varma]: by the way, is a design term. And what it means is that when you're working in a new
[Amit Varma]: format, to make it familiar to people who've used the old format, you reproduce some of
[Amit Varma]: those motifs, even though you don't have to. So for example, I think Apple had an eReader
[Amit Varma]: once, and they made it look like a bookshelf, you know,
[Guest]: or you can think of a music processing app like GarageBand having the same knobs, but
[Guest]: digital knobs, digital knobs, exactly, I used to the physical knob. So they translate, whereas
[Guest]: you don't need a knob anymore, because it's just moving your finger on a screen.
[Amit Varma]: It's moving. Yeah, yeah, that's fantastic. And a time will come when even people who've
[Amit Varma]: never used a physical knob will still be, you know, will think knobs are something because
[Guest]: if you think about I think the easiest example of skeuomorphic stuff is icons that we use.
[Guest]: So the use of the classical staff notation as the music icon, who recognizes that like
[Guest]: most people today don't, but that instinctively means music to us. And we know what's being
[Guest]: talked about, or even the folder icon on the desktop. And so in interesting observation
[Guest]: on that, like I was just reading this article about how somebody was talking about college
[Guest]: professors were speaking to design students about this idea of just a file organization.
[Guest]: And the new students have no concept of it. They don't understand what you mean by C drive,
[Guest]: then doing a docs folder, then another folder, because the way we use our phone, the way
[Guest]: we use these devices like iPad and things like tablets and things. So the idea of organizing
[Guest]: information in folders and directories with references is an older idea. And the idea
[Guest]: today is that everything is sort of like a big bag. I put it in and when I need it, there's
[Guest]: a find function that finds it for me. Why should I know where exactly what does it mean?
[Guest]: What does it matter where exactly it is located and cataloging something like that is already
[Guest]: a skeuomorphic idea.
[Amit Varma]: That's really interesting, because I use Rome research to take my node that is based on
[Amit Varma]: this old German system called Zettelkasten. Forgive me if I pronounce it wrong. That again
[Amit Varma]: doesn't have like a folders concept, though you can have it you have nested entries and
[Amit Varma]: you could think of each category there is a folder, but you also have bidirectional
[Amit Varma]: linking and you can get to any part of your repository from any other part. So that's
[Amit Varma]: kind of interesting. Let's now go back to where I normally start my episodes by talking
[Amit Varma]: about somebody's personal life. Like you are a Marwari from Calcutta who did engineering
[Amit Varma]: and build race cars. So tell me a little bit about your journey. Specifically, you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: you grew up in the 90s, presumably in Calcutta and all of that. Tell me what were those years
[Amit Varma]: like what was growing up in those years like what was Calcutta like? What did you want
[Amit Varma]: to be as a kid?
[Guest]: Yeah, sure. So for the longest time I can remember, I wanted to be a writer. This is
[Guest]: how I talk about it now that I'm a very deliberate writer. And I'm a very accidental artist.
[Guest]: Becoming an artist was never part of the plan until it sort of happened one day. And it
[Guest]: took me another year after that to accept that label. But so I grew up in Calcutta,
[Guest]: and I was a voracious reader, like any wannabe writer is to begin. And I would read everything
[Guest]: like I read books, and I read dictionaries, and I read encyclopedias, and I would read
[Guest]: instruction manuals, just if there is something with words on it, I will read it. And I will
[Guest]: just keep reading. My parents were very hands off, like they let me do things they let my
[Guest]: brother and I play however we wanted and do whatever we wanted. We didn't have many rules
[Guest]: set on us. One thing interesting about my life growing up in the 90s, because I am part
[Guest]: of the generation that had the big push towards engineering, right? So IITs became a thing
[Guest]: IIT-JEE and AIEEE and all these competitive exams and preparing for them became a thing,
[Guest]: very, very firmly a thing for us. And I in my high school years was the only person I
[Guest]: knew who did not have any tuitions. So I never took any tuitions for science studies. And
[Guest]: I gave all these entrance exams. And I gave all these entrance exams simply because that's
[Guest]: what's done like this idea of what do you want to do? I don't think it was ever put
[Guest]: to me. It was I maybe it's not something that quite occurred to my parents as that kind
[Guest]: of open world in which you just become whatever you want. And it was just taken for it was
[Guest]: implicit that you're good at science. So you will become an engineer. And I've always been
[Guest]: that way that I'm a very curious person. I like to know how things work. I'm always I
[Guest]: always try to figure things out. And I love learning. I just really love learning things.
[Guest]: So I pay I'm the guy who sits in the back row, but pays attention in class. I'm the
[Guest]: guy who sits in the back row but takes notes. So like I have diligent neat notes of all
[Guest]: my classes. Why do you sit in the back row? Just because I don't want to sit in the front
[Guest]: row. I will not be the kind of guy who sits in the front row. Okay, so there is a bit
[Guest]: of the rebel. But I just I love learning things like even in my college years when I was a
[Guest]: very, very anti-authoritarian, you know, anti-establishmentarian, contrarian rebel kind of person, I still took
[Guest]: diligent notes in class because I just loved thermodynamics. And I loved the mechanical
[Guest]: design and learning all these things. It was just so much cool stuff. I always wanted to
[Guest]: know it in my in when I was in class eight, my English literature professor stood me up
[Guest]: in class and said, Nishant, you are the most cynical person I have ever met in my life.
[Guest]: And I thought that was the greatest compliment someone could give me. Because for all my
[Guest]: these young years, I used to think that the only weapon or armor and it's sort of the
[Guest]: same thing at that age I had was my wit. I loved words and I loved what words could do,
[Guest]: how you could disarm someone or cut through them with sharp words. And I cultivated sharp
[Guest]: words, nice sentences, comebacks. I had all of those things because I always felt like
[Guest]: an outsider. So I was in very posh school of Calcutta. I was in La Martiniere for boys.
[Guest]: And I'm I wasn't the in crowd of that school as I saw it then. And as I see now, looking
[Guest]: back at it, I'll tell you an incident from it was really funny. And I recently refreshed
[Guest]: this incident in my mind, which sort of told me about my place in this world that I was
[Guest]: in in school, and I didn't realize how profound it is. So when I was in class six and seven,
[Guest]: backstreet boys were a big deal. And backstreet boys are a big deal. So spiked hair was a
[Guest]: big deal. Everybody had spiked hair. And I had no idea how this works. But I had classmates
[Guest]: who used to come with shiny, spiky hair, like shining, glistening and just staying there.
[Guest]: And I asked this classmate of mine how how this works, like what what are you doing to
[Guest]: your hair? And he just said, it's just water. I just put water and then I come and I used
[Guest]: to live an hour away from school, I would take this matador bus, which would take a
[Guest]: bunch of us students at 7am and 8am drop us off at school. It was hot. And it was it was
[Guest]: a long journey. And I would wet my hair just before leaving home and not dry it off and
[Guest]: then go into this bus and hope that it was like obviously it did not stay this way by
[Guest]: them in Calcutta. It did not stay this way by the time I reach school and those hairstyles
[Guest]: never worked for me. And all those years it never occurred to me that he was putting gel
[Guest]: on his hair. And not only was he putting gel on his hair, he was living he was getting
[Guest]: into an air conditioned car, and then coming to school and getting dropped off. And I was
[Guest]: taking a bus and all the air from outside and all the dust and everything was and it
[Guest]: never occurred to me that there was this huge difference. And I kept feeling like I am not
[Guest]: good enough. The privilege of gelled hair. Yeah, like I'm not cool enough for this. And
[Guest]: the way that I can be cool, what what is the armor that I can get? How can I feel good
[Guest]: about myself in this environment in which I feel inadequate? And that was words that
[Guest]: was being smart and being intelligent. So I love these authors who made me feel this
[Guest]: way. Like I love the twist of phrase that PG Woodhouse would bring into a book. I love
[Guest]: the kind of intelligent plotting that Agatha Christie would do in her novels. And I would
[Guest]: be like, yeah, if I can craft a novel like that, then somebody would read me and be like,
[Guest]: yeah, this guy's got it. So I wanted to be those things. And I grew up like that. And
[Guest]: I thought I wanted to be a writer. But it never occurred to me that you can become a
[Guest]: writer until I started blogging. Even then it didn't occur to me that you can become
[Guest]: a paid writer just by wanting to be so like, you can just you can just do it. And then
[Guest]: you can keep doing it. And then it'll it'll work like it never occurred to me. So what
[Guest]: do you do for studies? And my parents had engineering because I was good at science.
[Guest]: And that's what you do. If you're good at science, I got really high marks and things
[Guest]: like that. I was quite self destructive with all my competitive exams, I forgot to send
[Guest]: in the papers for my comet K, which is the entrance exam for Karnataka colleges. And
[Guest]: the day that your admit card is supposed to come, I opened my drawer to find that the
[Guest]: check is still in my drawer, I haven't posted it, I reached my AIEEE exam one hour after
[Guest]: it had already started, because I read the starting time wrong. So I did all kinds of
[Guest]: terrible things. And I got into only Manipal, where I went for engineering. I did pretty
[Guest]: well, I really enjoyed it. I got this opportunity in second year, to be part of this new group,
[Guest]: which was making a race car. And this is, it's not Formula One, but it's called Formula
[Guest]: Student. So it's the college student edition of Formula One. Formula One basically means
[Guest]: that it's a race car competition with certain rules around it. So there are rules of design,
[Guest]: there are restrictions on engine size, and all these various restrictions that Formula
[Guest]: One keeps updating. And if you stick to these restrictions, then you're a Formula One car.
[Guest]: And Formula Student similarly has its own set of rules. And universities all over the
[Guest]: world do this, but no Indian university was doing it at that time. And we were nobody's
[Guest]: if you're not even an IIT. I think IIT was doing it at that time, but not very well.
[Guest]: And we'd like it was quite audacious for us to do this. And in fact, our teachers, my
[Guest]: own teachers in mechanical engineering, told me, what's this? Why are you wasting your
[Guest]: time? Just get your degree, get a job, go by you, what are you doing? They wouldn't
[Guest]: give us attendance. Like, if we had to take time off from class to do some work, we wouldn't
[Guest]: get attendance, like we had to stick to everything. And then on top of that, do this, which is
[Guest]: a super non supportive framework, and it was very difficult. But we really wanted to do
[Guest]: it. And I just got a kick out of learning things and being able to do things. And I
[Guest]: was part of it. And we went to we raced that car in 2008. We went, we were the only Indian
[Guest]: team in a group of like 60 universities from around the world. In Italy, we went to the
[Guest]: Ferrari racetrack in Fiorano. It's the name of the racetrack is Fiorano racetrack. And
[Guest]: we were there in this town called Maranello in in rural Italy. And we raced our car there.
[Guest]: The next year, we went to Silverstone, which is where the British Grand Prix happens. We
[Guest]: had another car there. And that sort of liberated me from the restrictions of what the education
[Guest]: system was like. Because I was deeply disappointed when I first got to university. And I could
[Guest]: sense that we're just faking it here. They are pretending to teach, I pretend to learn.
[Guest]: And then I say some things at a job interview. And that guy pretends to get it. And maybe
[Guest]: he gives me a job. Like there's no real thing happening here. I really have questions. And
[Guest]: they don't want to answer because why are you asking these questions? These questions
[Guest]: are pointless, they won't come in the paper. What am I doing? Is this an education? And
[Guest]: this jadedness really set in around authority figures around around the thing, the hoops
[Guest]: that I have to pass. So I was angry at my parents for a little bit. I used to be like,
[Guest]: you know, you asked me to be an engineer, but do you know what it is to be an engineer?
[Guest]: How did you decide that you want me to be an engineer? Does it matter if I was a mechanical
[Guest]: engineer or a chemical engineer or a computer science engineer? It clearly it wouldn't have
[Guest]: mattered to them if I had gotten computer science engineering. Why not? It's a completely
[Guest]: different field. The skill set is completely different. And then that had me thinking about
[Guest]: what does it take to be a computer science engineer in India, to be a computer science
[Guest]: engineer in India, because that is the top field, you have to be really, really good
[Guest]: at organic chemistry. Does that make any sense at all? You have to know nothing about computer
[Guest]: science, you don't have to know how to write even a single line of code to get a computer
[Guest]: science engineering seat in it, whatever the top ideas, you need to be really good at organic
[Guest]: chemistry, though, because that's one third of the paper that you have to cross and I
[Guest]: hated chemistry. So in my particular gripe against organic chemistry is this that why
[Guest]: should I have to learn this? Maybe I can still be an engineer who doesn't know anything about
[Guest]: chemistry. And lucky for me that I ended up in mechanical engineering and I had nothing
[Guest]: to do with those things. Mechanical engineering was perfectly suited to me because it perfectly
[Guest]: vibed with my way of learning. And it's completely accidental that I got it. It's so wrong that
[Guest]: it had to happen this way. But this is how I learn. I have to internalize these ideas
[Guest]: that I read about. The reason why I take notes is because this is how I learn. I don't do
[Guest]: the tuitions. I don't have three hours every evening with lecturers and teachers after
[Guest]: class. And I'm lazy. I don't like to study. So how do I learn? At the first time, I take
[Guest]: notes while I'm in class. And that process of taking notes is your first layer of teaching
[Guest]: yourself and then you revise those things and then you get a second layer of understanding.
[Guest]: So I stuck with that through college, I would take notes. And mechanical engineering is
[Guest]: suited to that because mechanical engineering is about imbibing these ideas. And once you
[Guest]: sort of intuitively understand how things work, how thermodynamics goes, how designs
[Guest]: structures work, how loads fall, and you can you can sort of visualize all of these things.
[Guest]: And electrical engineering and all these things felt alien to me because I couldn't visualize
[Guest]: these circuits in my mind, at least. And so it was complete happenstance that I happened
[Guest]: to become a mechanical engineer, and that it worked with the way that I the ways that
[Guest]: my curiosity worked, and that I got this chance to make a race car. And because I got this
[Guest]: chance to make a race car, we went to Europe a couple of times with these race cars, and
[Guest]: we spoke to students from other universities. And I found out that in other countries, people
[Guest]: just do what they want to do this alien bizarre concept that you study what you wanted to
[Guest]: study, you have a curiosity and you take it. And nobody tells you that you don't deserve
[Guest]: to study here, or that you don't have to prove that you deserve to study in a good place.
[Guest]: So there's this thing I read much later, I think it's by Malcolm Gladwell, he talks about
[Guest]: these two models of education. So either a modeling agency route, or the army route in
[Guest]: the modeling agency route, you have to prove that you're good enough. And then they take
[Guest]: you on and they make you a model. In the army system, you get in, and they make you into
[Guest]: a soldier, they put you through the grind to become a you don't have to prove yourself,
[Guest]: you have basic qualifications, but you don't have to deserve to be there, the way you have
[Guest]: to prove your worth to be a model, we've kind of follow the former one in India, simply
[Guest]: because of our numbers, like we don't have a examination system, we have a filtration
[Guest]: system. If you can get through this IIT JEE, then because of simply because now you are
[Guest]: the top 5000 because of this exam, you deserve to be an IIT and it's nonsense. This is not
[Guest]: how you decide 16 year old is not positioned to say whether he wants to be a mechanical
[Guest]: or a computer science engineer or any of these things. It's just utter nonsense that we do.
[Guest]: We tell people that they should choose what they need to do at this early age, then we
[Guest]: berate them for not doing it enough, not committing hard enough. And then if it turns out many
[Guest]: years later that they made the wrong choice, and they're sad, then we berate them again
[Guest]: for why did you choose it in the first place. And how I think about it is that our entire
[Guest]: country suffers from what I call the Abhimanyu complex, that we've all been taught how to
[Guest]: get into this Kurukshetra from before birth only, that we have to get into it. Nobody
[Guest]: tells you what you're supposed to do once you get in. Nobody tells you why you got in.
[Guest]: Nobody tells you how you're going to get out. But you have to go that is beyond conversation
[Guest]: or debate. And it really made me very angry. And I saw this foreign university and how
[Guest]: they do things. And I decided I wanted to. This is how I told my father that I want to
[Guest]: get a real education. Now I've had it like I really want to I gave these interviews,
[Guest]: I have an ex I had a 8.7 CGPA. I have all these projects. I am the dean of our University
[Guest]: of Manipal. He would he held us up as an example to follow in front of everybody. Things like
[Guest]: this happened, but I did not feel like an engineer. I felt like I have faked it. I know
[Guest]: what work I did. I know how little you demanded of me. This is not an education. I really
[Guest]: want an education. And this ties into another idea I have about finite versus infinite games,
[Guest]: which maybe you can broach it a little later. I wanted an education. So I went to the TU
[Guest]: Delft, the Technical University of Delft in the Netherlands, I applied there because they
[Guest]: had a great formula student racing team, a friend and I both were kind of swayed by this
[Guest]: idea of biomechanics. And I got a little interested in the subject. So we did our bachelor's thesis
[Guest]: in Manipal together, which was working out how the structure, the musculoskeletal structure
[Guest]: of a knee joint, which has suffered from an ACL injury. And that got us animated about
[Guest]: the subject of biomechanics. And I applied for a master's degree in biomechanics at the
[Guest]: TU Delft. And I got in, I went there. And that was my master's degree. I spent two years
[Guest]: in which I unlearned everything. My model for this is that I demolished everything.
[Guest]: And I built a fresh foundation of knowledge. And biomechanical engineering came under the
[Guest]: umbrella of control engineering, in a sense. And now I think of myself as a control engineer.
[Guest]: And that term is super important to me. And I am a control engineer, even today that I'm
[Guest]: an artist, in many ways. And I learned some very, very deep, profound, amazing things
[Guest]: that I'm going to keep with me forever. And yeah, so I did this master's degree. And this
[Guest]: whole time, bachelor's degree, master's degree, I'm writing my blog, I'm drawing these web
[Guest]: comics, I started the web comic in the final year of bachelor's because everything was
[Guest]: such a joke, man, like we weren't doing serious work, there was so much free time. And we
[Guest]: were just messing the kind of things we did to kill time. So I started this web comic
[Guest]: just to make fun of my friends, and make jokes about life. Because humor was my weapon, humor
[Guest]: was my shield. And it's, I can't do that kind of humor anymore. So one of the reasons why
[Guest]: that web comic stopped was that I couldn't do that humor anymore. And that was a very
[Guest]: big moment in my life. And I realized why I can't do that humor anymore. And I'm writing
[Guest]: and I'm writing and I'm writing and I'm doing this blog and I'm doing the web comic becomes
[Guest]: from three times a week to once a week to once a month to once in two months, because
[Guest]: my studies are taking up more time. And what's happening is that I'm moving away from my
[Guest]: world. So I'm in this new place now. And I think that I should talk about Bollywood because
[Guest]: that's what I used to make fun of, I think I should talk about Indian life, because that's
[Guest]: what I know. And that's what my audience is about. And that's what I should talk about.
[Guest]: But I'm moving away from it, and it's getting harder to do it. So I'm doing it less, and
[Guest]: I'm feeling angrier because I'm not feeling fulfilled. After I finished my master's degree,
[Guest]: I got offered a PhD program in the university. And this was so my master's degree, my master's
[Guest]: thesis was on the subject of what is known as bimanual control. bimanual control is how
[Guest]: you manually control your two arms or two legs. So example, juggling, or playing drums,
[Guest]: things like that. And I was studying how there are these various models of bimanual control,
[Guest]: how the brain does this. So if you try to keep a beat 6060 beats per minute with your
[Guest]: right hand on the, and you can probably do a 30 beats per minute, meanwhile, so half
[Guest]: of that frequency with your left hand, but if you try to do 20, it would get tougher
[Guest]: if you try to do 25 and 60. So they're not multiples, it becomes very tough, because
[Guest]: now your brain has to do these crazy computations. And it's very difficult, you have to train
[Guest]: yourself to do it, you have to be a drummer or something like that was put in the hours,
[Guest]: then they can achieve limb independence. Like different limbs are not in order to process
[Guest]: complex information, what our brain does is it breaks it down into more like to reduce
[Guest]: the processing load. So if you try to keep these very, very discordant beats with two
[Guest]: different hands, and you're not trained as a drummer, your hands will automatically fall
[Guest]: into a simpler rhythm. And that is your brain trying to be like, Oh, I can't do this. But
[Guest]: this is a little easier to do. And I don't need to think about it too much. Because that
[Guest]: kind of processing of two different beats is very difficult. It's a lot of processing
[Guest]: power. So let's make it simpler. Why don't you do half of what this is instead of trying
[Guest]: to do three fifths of what this is. So instead of a complex beat, a slightly simpler beat
[Guest]: unless you train otherwise. So my thesis was about trying to figure out how these models
[Guest]: work, and how the muscles and the nerves and how they form this control model to describe
[Guest]: this whole thing, feedback and actuators and springs and dampers. So a mechanical system
[Guest]: to describe a biological reality. This is what biomechanical design was about in my
[Guest]: study, it was about the marriage of mechanical idea, mechanical principles and ideas to describe
[Guest]: biological phenomena. And it has applications in robotics, it has applications in orthopedics
[Guest]: and all kinds of assistive devices. But mine was because I am this stupid person who's
[Guest]: just animated by difficult things, because they are interesting. I chose the toughest
[Guest]: one that I could find for my PhD, which was how to stroke patients use their reflexes.
[Guest]: So let's do neuroscience. And this led to this research project that was offered to
[Guest]: me in my PhD program, which was about stroke patients. And the idea was to develop nice
[Guest]: rehabilitation programs for stroke patients. So stroke patients have a whole bunch of rehab
[Guest]: programs, which are very general. But what if we want to get specific, what if we want
[Guest]: to cut down the rehab time, therefore, like what if we know this person needs three months
[Guest]: of one thing instead of one year of this other thing, in order to become normal, we need
[Guest]: to understand what is their deficiencies, we need to have a number for those deficiencies.
[Guest]: So we need to quantify a lot of biological defects, quote unquote, or whatever the situation
[Guest]: is post stroke. And we need to have as many variables as we can get to describe the system
[Guest]: and get the numbers to where they need to be. So we need a mechanical understanding
[Guest]: of this system, because mechanical systems have sensors, sensors give you numbers, and
[Guest]: numbers are can be fit into equations, we need equations, and we need mechanical understandings
[Guest]: of what's going on, like what happened in the brain? How does that react to the muscles?
[Guest]: How do their arms move? How do you describe this arm and its movement as various mechanical
[Guest]: phenomena? What are the numbers that are useful? What are the eigenvalues? So the eigenvalues
[Guest]: are the least number of variables you need to describe something perfectly. What are
[Guest]: the eigenvalues? What is the eigenvector? And what is the values within them? So these
[Guest]: are the eigenvalues within the eigenvector, identify the vector. So it's a process of
[Guest]: what's known as black box system identification. If you have a system that you can't open up,
[Guest]: so it's a black box, you don't know how it literally works, you can only hit it and you
[Guest]: can see what happens. So you can put an input, you can get an output. And then you can be
[Guest]: output divide by input is equal to system. And then try to with intelligent inputs, try
[Guest]: to figure out what is this system. So we need to do black box system identification of brain
[Guest]: of a body that has been affected by a stroke, a cortical stroke, and therefore has muscular
[Guest]: neuromuscular deficiencies. And that meant learning a lot more about biology. So project
[Guest]: was in collaboration with the Northwestern University in Chicago. And I went to Chicago
[Guest]: to do experiments. The first time I went to Chicago, and I was vehemently opposed to it
[Guest]: because I hated America at that point. I thought it represents all the evil of the world and
[Guest]: I don't want to be in America, I'm not gonna like it. Chicago means guns and violence.
[Guest]: I got to Chicago during the first polar vortex of 2013. It was three days, the first three
[Guest]: days were shut down, nobody went anywhere, minus 45 degrees Celsius. The first day that
[Guest]: I stepped out, I fell in love with the city completely. Chicago absolutely changed my
[Guest]: whole life. Everything I am today, everything that I've been able to do is because of that
[Guest]: city. And I went there only because of doing all these other random things that were not
[Guest]: what I really, really, really wanted to do. They were simply things I was good at. And
[Guest]: there is this joy of achievement you get. And that's also a nice high, it's a nice kick.
[Guest]: I'm good at it. And I do it and I get rewarded and it's nice. University system rewards are
[Guest]: nicely set up. You know, you do this much work, you get so reward and it feels nice,
[Guest]: you can feel good about life. And it carries you through to a lot. So it brought me to
[Guest]: Chicago. And I'm doing experiments with stroke patients, fascinating people. I met somebody
[Guest]: who used to train with Chuck Norris. I met someone who was on the original 21 team, the
[Guest]: MIT team that did the thing in Vegas or Atlantic City, the blackjack players. So he has now
[Guest]: had a stroke, he would take 15 minutes to come from the door to the seat. Because he
[Guest]: couldn't walk, he would walk so slowly. But he had stories like he had real stories. Now
[Guest]: he travels to casinos all over the world. In order to spot card counters. He teaches
[Guest]: people how to spot card counters because he's one of them. This is the outlaw who's become
[Guest]: the sheriff. Exactly, right. So this is how he makes his money. And he would tell me these
[Guest]: stories while we were doing nine hour long experiments. It would take me half an hour
[Guest]: just to unclench his fist because of the stroke. And it's so debilitating. But anyway, so I'm
[Guest]: doing these experiments, I'm learning, I'm having a good time implementing these ideas,
[Guest]: figuring things out. But I'm feeling creatively unfulfilled. I want to write, I want to be
[Guest]: a writer. This is the first thing I said to my girlfriend on our first date we met in
[Guest]: Manipal in the first year. And I told her one day I'm going to be a writer. And she
[Guest]: just laughed that oh, you're an engineer, you're becoming an engineer, though. And there's
[Guest]: no pathway visible. How will you? How do you become a writer? There's no pathway to becoming
[Guest]: a writer anyway. But I wanted it I this is what I wanted to do. And I've always doing
[Guest]: it on the side. And what Chicago did was that after my experiments in the evenings, I would
[Guest]: go to open mic nights. I would write because I've always been writing funny things. I did
[Guest]: stand up, I would go up on stage in front of a bunch of people who are not from my world,
[Guest]: who will not understand the jokes that I've always written. So I have to say something
[Guest]: new. And I have to say something that they will get and they will laugh at. And sometimes
[Guest]: I failed. Sometimes I did pretty well. Maybe they were being kind, I don't know. But I
[Guest]: got this rush from it. And first rush was that I did it. The second rush was that I
[Guest]: was surrounded by people, some of whom were not very good. But I would see them every
[Guest]: night at this club, the next club, because so Chicago is a is the world capital of stand
[Guest]: up comedy. Every night of the week, you can find a free open mic somewhere or the other
[Guest]: as audience or as a wannabe comedian. Same for music. And every night of the week, you
[Guest]: can find it. I would see these guys night after night after night. I'm not doing anything
[Guest]: because I'm nervous today. I don't feel like doing it. But this guy's going and he's not
[Guest]: very good. I know he's not good, but he's really doing this. And I got this from America,
[Guest]: but if you really want to do it, just do it. And that's when I sort of understood what
[Guest]: they keep talking about when they say freedom, because I didn't get it before this. Americans
[Guest]: are crazy people. They just do things like they just they just do whatever they want
[Guest]: to do. Like, they have no qualms. They have no they don't feel like misfits. It's interesting.
[Guest]: Like the word misfit, right? The word misfit implies that you're supposed to fit. Because
[Guest]: that's what Indian culture is you fit. And if you otherwise you're a misfit, and that's
[Guest]: a bad thing. What if there's no standard of fitting? You can't be a misfit anymore, right?
[Guest]: What if there's no requirement to fit? That's what America was like. They'll just say anything
[Guest]: like people will be dressed in all kinds of ways. People will be having these super dramatic
[Guest]: phone call conversations on the bus, not caring that people can hear hear them. People are
[Guest]: like really being themselves on a stage, even if they are introverted in real life, what
[Guest]: freedom and they gave me permission to do the same. I looked at them and I said, Why
[Guest]: am I not doing this? Because I have a certain degree of privilege. My girlfriend had started
[Guest]: working. She's a dentist. She went to the US to study to practice there. And she just
[Guest]: started working. And she told me why aren't you doing this? You want to be a writer become
[Guest]: a writer? Why are you doing this PhD stuff? I thought No, I have what I can't I can't
[Guest]: quit. Can I? But Chicago told me Yes, why can't you quit? You have the freedom. If you
[Guest]: want to do it, you have to do it. And I recognized that I have the privilege. A lot of people
[Guest]: want to do these things, but they their circumstances don't allow them to maybe they really need
[Guest]: to earn next month's rent. Maybe they really have big big loans to pay off. My PhD program
[Guest]: luckily paid me nicely enough that I was able to pay off my master student loan. And I had
[Guest]: somebody willing to support me. I felt like privilege was like this trampoline with the
[Guest]: privilege came the responsibility. How can you ignore the value of your privilege? There
[Guest]: are people who want to do this who are not able to you can do it and you want to do it,
[Guest]: but you are afraid of how we will explain it. I can't do that. That's not okay. I wanted
[Guest]: to do something that I really, really, really wanted to chase. And at the same time with
[Guest]: my studies, I had come to this idea that a PhD program needs 200% from you. This has
[Guest]: to be what you sleep dream about. This is what you think about all the time. I knew
[Guest]: that honestly, I'm able to give this 90%. I like it. I'm excited by learning. But PhD
[Guest]: is not about learning. You are now at the at the at the frontier. You have to discover
[Guest]: you have to prove things. And I am not as motivated in this field with the level of
[Guest]: explicit mathematical knowledge it needs not an implicit understanding, but an explicit
[Guest]: application of the knowledge. And I am not enamored by that aspect. I loved it while
[Guest]: I was learning things. But now that I have to do further, I am not as excited anymore.
[Guest]: And I'm surrounded by people who are excited by it. All my fellow researchers, my fellow
[Guest]: PhD postdocs, they were super enamored and excited and passionate about their things.
[Guest]: And I felt like I was faking it in comparison to them. And that's not fair to them. That's
[Guest]: not fair to my professors. And that's not how things like I don't want my life to be
[Guest]: about that. So quite quickly, I reached this decision that this means that I'm quitting.
[Guest]: And I've I feel I've kind of always been like that. Like I can't do something if I'm not
[Guest]: once I lose interest, I can't push myself anymore. Like that's the day that I just stop.
[Guest]: And so I just stopped like just like how I stopped studying organic chemistry in class
[Guest]: 11. And I paid the price in my ITJ exams and all the other exams, all the organic chemistry
[Guest]: sections are empty. I didn't answer anything because I like I can't do it. It's not something
[Guest]: I hate it. So I stopped. I told my professor I'm leaving. I went home and I told my parents
[Amit Varma]: that I'm quitting my PhD program to become a writer and to live with my girlfriend, a
[Guest]: nightmare for Indian parents. Such a funny conversation. So my parents are incredible
[Guest]: people in this respect, because they needed just a few conversations over a week's time.
[Guest]: And they were okay with it. They have empowered me a lot. They have given me the permission
[Guest]: to do things, to be myself, to even disobey is a permission like I have never faced serious
[Guest]: consequences for disagreeing with them. I have never been punished in I have never like,
[Guest]: you know, been slapped or corporal punishment or in threatened or intimidated. So that also
[Guest]: is permission. And that made me who I am. And they trusted who I am. When I told them
[Guest]: that I'm quitting my PhD program to be a writer, I could show them 400 webcomic strips that
[Guest]: I had drawn. I could show them dozens of scripts I had written. I had written for a YouTube
[Guest]: show at that time. I had done I had written six months for NDTV's Gustakhi Maaf, the puppet
[Guest]: 6-7 minute puppet show episodes they would have about current events. I had done that.
[Guest]: I had so many blog articles and stories. I had all these ideas. I had put in the work.
[Guest]: And I was telling them that instead of doing this in the evening, with two hours of time,
[Guest]: I want this to be my race. This is how I put it to them that everything is a marathon.
[Guest]: There's no overnight success. Everything is going to take a lot out of me. I want to be
[Guest]: in the race that I want to be in. I have understood which race I want to be in. And at this point,
[Guest]: it is wrong for me to continue in the other race simply with the idea that finish to Karlo.
[Guest]: My mother still sometimes says this to me Khatam to Karleta PhD. And it's just key,
[Guest]: I would have lost two or two and a half more years. And once I knew that I don't want to
[Guest]: do it, it's not good. It's not fair anyway. And that's a different argument like to others
[Guest]: around me for me to continue in this fake mode. But it's not fair to myself to do this
[Guest]: thing. So I quit. My girlfriend was working in Chicago. We got married a few months after
[Guest]: that, I moved in with her and I started to become a writer. And then I started on this
[Guest]: journey that suddenly made me an artist. But we can go into that. I think I should pause
[Amit Varma]: at this point because I've been going on and on.
[Amit Varma]: No, no. These are the conversations which are most delightful to me when I can just
[Amit Varma]: sit back and listen. Bunch of things I want to double click into. But before I continue,
[Amit Varma]: you know, with your journey as a writer slash artist and all of that bunch of things. Firstly,
[Amit Varma]: you know what you said about education strikes a chord and many guests have spoken on this
[Amit Varma]: topic before I think Anirban Mahapatra was the last and in fact, the most popular episode
[Amit Varma]: of my show right now, overtaking my episodes on Kashmir and CAA with Srinath Raghavan is
[Amit Varma]: the one I did on education with Karthik Muralidharan, which has just gotten to number one. And there
[Amit Varma]: he speaks at length about how our system is set up for sorting not teaching exactly as
[Amit Varma]: you said, you just want to sort out who are the brightest kids and then whatever happens
[Amit Varma]: happens and you see the successes of that but don't realize that it was because of incredibly
[Amit Varma]: smart to begin with and you found them and not necessarily that you taught them something.
[Amit Varma]: Earlier you were talking about your cynicism. And you've written a beautiful post about
[Amit Varma]: this, which of course I linked from the show notes. But I want to read out a bit from that
[Amit Varma]: before I go on to my next question, where you talk about how you discovered the power
[Amit Varma]: of being cynical. And you write quote, cynicism was smartness, cynicism was pragmatic, cynicism
[Amit Varma]: was a way of adults. I took pride in my cynicism. It helped me fight off insecurities before
[Amit Varma]: the popular guys in school. It helped me deal with my social inadequacies. It gave me a
[Amit Varma]: sense of humor. I won many battles with the sharp edge of my wit. Over the years, I honed
[Amit Varma]: it to terrific sharpness. In college, a professor asked me not to be over smart. I asked him
[Amit Varma]: to explain exactly how smart I should be in that case. He kicked me out of the class but
[Amit Varma]: the rest of the students laughed and that was my win. I made funny comics mocking the
[Amit Varma]: idiosyncrasies of my friends. I wrote funny stories with elaborate dialogue and plots
[Amit Varma]: that pointed to the foolishness of trying the inevitable failure of all action. I made
[Amit Varma]: a lot of people laugh, and so on. And then you say in a later para, but one day I found
[Amit Varma]: the fountain of my creativity had gone dry. I could not write. After struggling for many
[Amit Varma]: months, I came to the conclusion that I had reached the end of my tether with cynicism.
[Amit Varma]: Cynicism is like a wall we build inside our mind brick by brick. We do it to protect what
[Amit Varma]: is most vulnerable inside us. We hide that thing behind walls so others cannot know.
[Amit Varma]: So they cannot mock us the way we mock them. It shields us from people and also from other
[Amit Varma]: horrors of the outside world, pain and fear and shame and rejection. Nothing cannot breach
[Amit Varma]: these defenses. Every year the walls grow higher. Every morning you climb the ramparts
[Amit Varma]: and rain arrows upon the enemy at the gates, stop good. Which is sort of a beautifully
[Amit Varma]: put description of a defense mechanism, which many of us have, which I think to some extent
[Amit Varma]: I also had when I was a kid where with your cleverness, you know, it's like you don't
[Amit Varma]: know where you stand in the world. So to hide the doubts of your own inadequacies, you you
[Amit Varma]: adopt a superior position by mocking others. And that's really easy to do. And that's something
[Amit Varma]: that you see on Twitter all the time where everyone's standing in judgment upon everybody
[Amit Varma]: else because that's easy to do. It's an easy way to say, look, I'm so virtuous. I'm so
[Amit Varma]: good. I'm so right. But my question is not about that. My question is that in your writing
[Amit Varma]: this there is tremendous self-awareness. And one of the things I've realized about my own
[Amit Varma]: writing when I do look back is that a lot of that self-awareness comes from writing
[Amit Varma]: about it. That till the moment that you start writing and you start examining your childhood,
[Amit Varma]: you are not aware that you were like this, but then it becomes explicit. Like in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: you spoke earlier in the context of your PhD program that you were more towards implicit
[Amit Varma]: understanding and not explicit application. And here it seems that by writing, you're
[Amit Varma]: getting this implicit understanding of your own self. And then just that understanding
[Amit Varma]: in a sense is automatically an explicit application because you are changing as you look back
[Amit Varma]: on the older you. So is this how it was for you as well, that writing became also a powerful
[Guest]: tool to understand yourself?
[Guest]: Yeah. Yeah. So once writing started to become difficult for the first time, like why did
[Guest]: it become difficult for the first time? I reached this very profound understanding that
[Guest]: I want to share. It's simply put the fact that other people exist. That's it. I am not
[Guest]: the universe and other people are not revolving around me. They are actually real people.
[Guest]: Women are real people too. I can't just make sexist jokes. Other people have other skills
[Guest]: and they might not be good with their words. And this might be my superpower, so to say,
[Guest]: but this doesn't make me powerful. This doesn't make me a hero. If I have hurt someone, other
[Guest]: people exist. And this took time because initially this first phase of writing the blogs that
[Guest]: I wrote from 2006 to 2010, the comics that I drew, I was the only person who existed.
[Guest]: I was the unfortunate one. I was the I had no privilege. I was suffering. I was sidelined.
[Guest]: I was hitting back. So everything was allowed. I'm defending myself. I'm not lashing out.
[Guest]: I'm defending myself. So everything is allowed. In the process of writing stories, though,
[Guest]: what happens is like these walls that I wrote about that you quoted, these walls that you
[Guest]: build up, what it does is it encloses your world. And I realized that if I want to write
[Guest]: good stories, I have to feel real things. I have to grow my world. You can't grow your
[Guest]: world once you've built walls. You have to shatter those walls and then you have to accept
[Guest]: everything. You have to accept everything that comes, including the pain. Cynicism helps
[Guest]: to shield you from pain and from explicitly feeling pain. But you have to welcome that
[Guest]: pain. You have to welcome sadness and you have to welcome feeling inadequate and processing
[Guest]: that as a human emotion that is valid and not something to be shunned. And then let's
[Guest]: just make a quick repartee and then forget about it because look, I'm funny.
[Guest]: This process was important to go through because I wanted to be a good writer. I wanted to
[Guest]: be not a successful writer in the literal term. I wanted to be a really good writer.
[Guest]: I wanted to do all the really great things and thereby get success. But success was not
[Guest]: the end. The end was being really, really good. And that means feeling this pain, letting
[Guest]: this pain happen to you. And I would read more things and I would read books and I would
[Guest]: see people go through this. So I remember reading Shantaram in which he talks about
[Guest]: the process of grieving and the process of loss. And this is this big hulking New Zealand
[Guest]: person who is talking about crying and talking about crying alone in a room and hiding his
[Guest]: tears from other people. And he makes you feel it. I wanted to do that. I wanted to
[Guest]: not just feel it. I wanted to make people feel it. That's the kind of writer I want
[Guest]: to be. I want to be able to like if people have heartstrings, I want to play them. I
[Guest]: want to be able to play music on other people's heartstrings. I want to tug at them and pull
[Guest]: at them and pluck at them at my will. I want to have that power. And that power means giving
[Guest]: up control. That power means shattering these walls and letting in the whole world. Once
[Guest]: I did that, the immediate consequence was that the first source of my humor, which is
[Guest]: pointing at other people and laughing, ran dry. I couldn't do it. I couldn't be that
[Guest]: cynical person anymore. Cynicism had to be defeated. I had to let the shields down. So
[Guest]: I did that. And that was really important for me to become the kind of writer who could
[Guest]: write the way that you've read out that to be able to be self-aware like that, so that
[Guest]: I can write stories in which my characters are not self-aware, but are going through
[Guest]: these things. The writer has to know so much more than his characters are allowed to know.
[Guest]: I think about this quote from a movie I saw. I don't know if you've seen it. It's called
[Guest]: Superman of Malegaon. So it's this independent movie. It's about a bunch of filmmakers in
[Guest]: Malegaon, which is, I think, in Maharashtra itself. And they have Maliwood. They make
[Guest]: movies with a handicap. They have no technology, but they want to make a Superman movie now.
[Guest]: So this is a documentary following these real people who are actually trying to make a Superman
[Guest]: movie, Superman of Malegaon. And the documentary is called Superman of Malegaon because these
[Guest]: people are the supermen. And they are finding out what is a green screen and how do you
[Guest]: do video editing for a green screen. It's a fantastic movie. It's on YouTube to watch.
[Guest]: Everybody should watch it. Like truly profound movie and beautifully made, very funny. But
[Guest]: the writer in that movie, he says this thing that it's stuck, it's seared into my brain.
[Guest]: He said that the best writer in the best of times can communicate only a tenth of what
[Guest]: he wants to communicate. The rest of the pain he has to bear. It is his pain. He will never
[Guest]: be able to share it. Not being able to share it is pain. But even that emotion itself is
[Guest]: unshared, has to live inside him 10 times the emotion of what he's able to put out.
[Guest]: So to be a good writer, it was my responsibility to take 10 times that pain that I wanted to
[Guest]: show. Another reason why I had to break down these walls. In the effort, therefore, of
[Guest]: trying to be a good writer, I realized what I was doing wrong. In writing again and again,
[Guest]: this character, these ideas and putting them out in stories and failing, I realized what
[Guest]: I was doing wrong before. And that's where all of the self-realization came from. A bit
[Guest]: of the externalization is thanks to the fact that I lived in the Netherlands where you
[Guest]: have access to excellent recreational drugs to help you with externalization. But mostly
[Guest]: it was the writing and the really wanting to be good, just good.
[Amit Varma]: So this is a lovely word I came across in another of your newsletter posts from the
[Amit Varma]: Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows. And it's a word called Sonder, which is defined as, quote,
[Amit Varma]: the realization that each random passerby is living a life as vivid and complex as your
[Amit Varma]: own, populated with their own ambitions, friends, routines, worries, and inherited craziness.
[Amit Varma]: An epic story in which you might appear only once as an extra sipping coffee in the background
[Amit Varma]: as a blur of traffic passing on the highway as a lighted window at dusk, stop quote. You
[Amit Varma]: know, and this obviously speaks to that thing you said about realizing that there were other
[Amit Varma]: people. And you've also quoted, you know, Sartre in another of your posts saying hell
[Amit Varma]: is other people, which is something, you know, as an introvert, I completely get where that
[Amit Varma]: is coming from. And I don't know if it's a moral dilemma or an existential dilemma or
[Amit Varma]: what category it falls into. But when the time comes that you realize this, and you
[Amit Varma]: realize this in a visceral way, and you realize that you've kind of been living your life
[Amit Varma]: as if you are all that matters, and everyone else is a character in the play inside your
[Amit Varma]: own head, it then takes moral significance that you make them something more of a character,
[Amit Varma]: a mere character that you see them as a flesh and blood people as they are, you know, to
[Amit Varma]: invoke, you know, Kant's categorical imperative, that you see them as not a means to an end,
[Amit Varma]: but as an end in itself. And even if I remind myself of that, I wonder if I find it hard
[Amit Varma]: to do and at some level, I wonder if it's possible to do at all. And with you this kind
[Amit Varma]: of, I mean, you've probably thought much more about this, because a lot of what you are
[Amit Varma]: known for when people first hear of you, the whole sneaky art business is really absorbing
[Amit Varma]: other people as other people, and letting yourself be the background. So on the one
[Amit Varma]: hand, you are just conscious of other people, it's, you know, you're making them vivid.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, you are the one observing, it is what you are doing, it is an act of
[Amit Varma]: ego, or just assuming that something that you draw of other people add something to
[Amit Varma]: the world or is meaningful. And again, an act of ego and arrogance that you also written
[Amit Varma]: about eloquently. So, you know, so what are sort of your thoughts on all of this?
[Guest]: One thing that helped me to this realizations, and regarding other people as real people
[Guest]: was also the change in my life circumstances. So when I went to the US, I gave up a lot
[Guest]: of things, right, I gave up a previous identity, I gave up the race that I was in, in favor
[Guest]: of something new. And I had to redefine these structures of my life. One of the early silly
[Guest]: little thing that I had was that I had lived a very nicely categorizable life, like quantifiable
[Guest]: life, you could measure success, what is a good day, this is the work I have today as
[Guest]: a researcher, this so much progress, I can measure it, I can put a percentage term to
[Guest]: it, I can evaluate it as a monthly, yearly, six monthly basis and understand how well
[Guest]: I did. But as a creative person, how the hell do I find out what is a good day of work?
[Guest]: There are no numbers anymore. There is no way to quantify there are no good metrics.
[Guest]: For a time, I became like really big on Google Calendar, like putting everything like there
[Guest]: is one year of my life, which is entirely on Google Calendar every single day, every
[Guest]: single hour. And I thought that would help, but it didn't. But anyway, the point of this
[Guest]: is that I was redefining a lot of life, life's understand purpose point, how I am who I am.
[Guest]: And I was in this new world, I was an immigrant in the new world. Part of what also helps
[Guest]: you to remain this, I am the only thing that matters in India is, it's nice, it's easy
[Guest]: if you're a male in India, right? So if you go to another place where you're suddenly
[Guest]: not the top dog, not at the top of the pyramid, you suddenly see that, oh, there is this pyramid.
[Guest]: Because now I'm not at the top anymore, I get to see up and there is people above me
[Guest]: and I get to see also down sometimes. And then I see, oh, wait, I'm somewhere in the
[Guest]: middle here. So there is this whole structure here. And this was another way to sort of,
[Guest]: I needed to put myself somewhere, I needed to see where I belong, I needed to see who
[Guest]: I am, and what is this place, it's another line of curiosity that came in, right? So
[Guest]: I'm, I want to learn things I want to learn now about this world that I inhabit. So, sneaky
[Guest]: art started as my way, one of the reasons it became this way was that I wanted to unobtrusively
[Guest]: observe my world to see what this world is all about. Because I was in these alien places.
[Guest]: While I was in Chicago for a few months, it was good, one of the most beautiful famous
[Guest]: cities of the world, buildings and tourist destinations and all kinds of people you can,
[Guest]: so much stuff for art. And I'm a sneaky artist, we kind of didn't go into how that started,
[Guest]: we will again, but just coming to this point, is that I was trying to really just see how
[Guest]: things operate. Once I moved to Wisconsin, I wanted to see, now that I don't have these
[Guest]: big tourist attractions, these obvious artistic choices, it will look great, look at these
[Guest]: amazing skyscrapers of Chicago, everybody will want to see it. How do I find art now
[Guest]: in this world? It's a semi rural town I was in, I had no mental picture of, there were
[Guest]: no people who looked like me around, there were just other people. It was the start of
[Guest]: the Trump years. And I had all reasons to feel out of place and nervous. And like I
[Guest]: don't belong. I needed to find a way to belong. And art became my way to sort of discover
[Guest]: that. And this helped me to, to see other people, to observe other people, because I
[Guest]: didn't, I couldn't be obsessed with myself, because I knew that I don't matter here. So
[Guest]: I was sort of helped by these adverse circumstances to reject my ideas of myself. And to just
[Guest]: see because I desperately need to feel comfortable in this uncomfortable place. Because I'm such
[Guest]: an alien, I feel like an alien every day. So I need to look at these people, I need
[Guest]: to understand these people. And I need to find out the ways that they are not different,
[Guest]: but the ways that they are similar to me, so that I can feel that we have a bond, so
[Guest]: that I can feel comfortable about going to a cafe, which has only people who look completely
[Amit Varma]: different from me.
[Amit Varma]: Does the looking change you like one of the things that I've noticed in myself, and I
[Amit Varma]: think in a lot of people, but it's there in differing degrees to people is how much of
[Amit Varma]: the world is invisible or unseen, as it were, to me that I go on the street, and I'm not
[Amit Varma]: even noticing most people right. And for you one, I imagine that the just the act of looking
[Amit Varma]: and looking with the kind of closeness that you must have looked would have changed something
[Amit Varma]: about you in some way, like in the context of podcasts, and you're also a podcaster.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll talk about both of these in detail, as we go along both the public art and the
[Amit Varma]: podcasting. But I do feel that doing these long episodes kind of forced me to listen
[Amit Varma]: much more and therefore, made me a better listener and maybe made me a better person
[Amit Varma]: on the margins, because I'm just listening more. And I'm not, it's not all about me,
[Amit Varma]: me. It's not about the ego. It's not about always trying to interrupt to show how smart
[Amit Varma]: you are, but actually kind of sit back and take it in and learn something. So do you
[Amit Varma]: feel that in that sense that not just the looking, also in the context of the podcast,
[Amit Varma]: you also now do long episodes, which are more than three hours, the looking, the listening,
[Amit Varma]: that they change the person you are that when you look at, say the Nishant who started drawing
[Amit Varma]: the web comics back in the day with the cynicism and the sarcasm and the cleverness and the
[Amit Varma]: biting wit, and you look at yourself today, where that cynicism and sarcasm and biting
[Amit Varma]: wit are not there, you're just sitting back and you're watching, or you're sitting back
[Amit Varma]: and you're listening. And do you think you're a fundamentally different person for that?
[Guest]: Yeah, it's it made me a much nicer person. I am a very patient listener. In fact, when
[Guest]: I draw, I'm an even more patient listener, because I don't interrupt at all. So the best
[Guest]: time to talk to me, if you want to say things to me, is to get me to start drawing things
[Guest]: because then I won't move for an hour and I'll be listening.
[Guest]: I'm sure this is a lesson your wife is learning.
[Guest]: This is the one pleasure she gets from the fact that I am likely to sit down anywhere
[Guest]: and start drawing, which is quite a problem when you go on vacation, that this guy just
[Guest]: takes out a sketchbook everywhere. And then he wants a half hour over here when we could
[Guest]: be doing something else. So it's a pros and cons. But as I like to remind her, this is
[Guest]: a good time to talk to me. I am listening. So like Frasier Crane. Yeah, so being an artist,
[Guest]: like the kind of artist I am, it has really made me very observant. And you're right exactly
[Guest]: that the way our life is right now, we don't give too much attention to things because
[Guest]: so many things demand our attention all the time. There is not only things around us.
[Guest]: So if you compare to 100 years ago, the amount of traffic, the amount of hoardings and signals
[Guest]: and people, all of these are things that requires little, little bits of attention, even just
[Guest]: to be aware of them. Then there's the phone. Maybe it rings, maybe it pings, maybe it doesn't.
[Guest]: And there is the possibility that there is amazing stuff happening on Twitter right now.
[Guest]: So that maybe there's something I'm missing out on is also another attention requirement
[Guest]: in the back of your head, which you have to sort of drill down and bury deep into you
[Guest]: in order to neglect that maybe I should just scroll Instagram for a bit just to see maybe
[Guest]: something amazing is happening, even if it isn't. I sometimes feel that just this, those
[Guest]: few seconds that I spend before I launch the app, that moment of expectation is the joy.
[Guest]: That's a dopamine coming. The expectation of the dopamine is the dopamine at this point.
[Guest]: So because inevitably, there's nothing interesting on Twitter, it aggravates me instead. But
[Amit Varma]: just the idea that maybe there could be, you never know, someone could be wrong on the
[Guest]: internet, and I could have to argue with I could get this golden opportunity. And just
[Guest]: that microsecond is the joy, in fact. So being an artist has made me a better observer. And
[Guest]: it has helped me to drown out these noises. So the only time I'm not actively thinking
[Guest]: and overthinking, which I am apt to do is when I'm drawing. The only time I'm not worried
[Guest]: about where I am and what million stupid things are running through my head anxieties is when
[Guest]: I'm drawing it, I'm at complete peace, just absolutely Zen. I am a little bit nervous
[Guest]: until I start to draw about where I am, are people looking at me, etc, etc. This is I'm
[Guest]: self conscious. But the moment I put the pen to the paper, I lose all of that those moments
[Guest]: are just so precious to me. And I speak to urban sketches on my podcast, and we talk
[Guest]: about this experience and what it does, why we do it. Because if you think about it, the
[Guest]: idea that there are grown adults who spend their precious leisure time walking around
[Guest]: the street sitting with a sketchbook drawing something, most of them are not going to sell
[Guest]: that art. Most of them are not necessarily great artists, but they still do it. The vast
[Guest]: majority of the global urban sketching community and it is a huge growing community all over
[Guest]: the world. The vast majority of it are not professional artists. And those people absolutely
[Guest]: fascinate me, because they have a real articulated to themselves reason for for doing this. And
[Guest]: a reason that has nothing to do with an end. With another end. It's not a means to at the
[Guest]: end of making sales or becoming an artist or becoming big or sharing getting 5000 likes.
[Guest]: The activity is the end itself. They are getting something from just doing this. And that is
[Guest]: the real joy that I acquire in my podcast as well. And I get this from people that it
[Guest]: doesn't matter how you draw, what it looks like is so irrelevant. Just that you spend
[Guest]: two hours doing it is the joy of that two hours is the real value that you really squeezed
[Guest]: those two hours for everything. So I look through my sketchbook. Now, there is the things
[Guest]: that I drew. So there is the things that I looked at. But there are the things that I
[Guest]: didn't draw. I look through a sketchbook that is two years old. And I can remember sounds
[Guest]: I can remember if I was listening to a podcast or if I was overhearing a conversation. I
[Guest]: can I remember the smells I remember the temperature of the day I remember if it was windy. I remember
[Guest]: what it felt like to be sitting where I was sitting who was around me. All these senses
[Guest]: come rushing back. It's as if I'm in this hyper aware state. And all of those things
[Guest]: are locked into that page. And this is not just me. I'm not special in this. This is
[Guest]: a case for anybody who's doing this. This is consistent with all urban sketches I speak
[Guest]: to. It's simply the act of doing this, that does this to you the act of observation, and
[Guest]: the act of patient observation, the value of giving not just your attention, but really
[Guest]: giving your time to something sustained attention. It's become so rare. We don't even do that
[Guest]: to the television we're watching. We watch TV and we're also scrolling at the same time
[Guest]: on our phones. Most television is watched like that now. But this is something because
[Guest]: it involves your hands and your eyes and you have to be sitting you can't be doing 10 different
[Guest]: things. And it pushes you to engage. And that is the most beautiful thing you can do. And
[Guest]: you find amazing art everywhere that you look once you start to do it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, you called it the Zen state, I guess people could call it flow or sportsman
[Amit Varma]: could call it you know, being in the zone. And it's weird that I find it very hard to
[Amit Varma]: come about and the other things I do like writing, for example, it's just very hard
[Amit Varma]: to get in the zone. Most of the time, it's just hard work and you kind of have to battle
[Amit Varma]: through it and get it done. But this kind of thing, just sitting and drawing something
[Amit Varma]: seems to me to combine two things. One is that your mind is kind of empty. It's not
[Amit Varma]: cluttered with other stuff happening. And at the same time, it's very focused on what
[Amit Varma]: you're doing. And at the same time, there's a physical aspect to it where your hands are
[Amit Varma]: kind of moving and all of that. And you point out that many of the people you speak to also
[Amit Varma]: experience the same kind of flow doing this. So perhaps if you don't think of it as art,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it's something therapeutic and useful on its own. Is that what you'd say?
[Guest]: Well, so the word art is a very strange word. So many people define it in such terrible,
[Guest]: oppressive, prohibitive ways. Art with a capital A especially, it's a scary word. We would
[Guest]: rather not do it because we don't want to be pretending like we can do it because we're
[Guest]: not allowed to do it. Not anybody can just make art. Who am I to just make art? And I
[Guest]: don't know if it helps to think of it like that. Or maybe the the key is to defeat this
[Guest]: terrible notion of what is art and oh my God, am I an artist? Maybe the key is to not think
[Guest]: like this and to just own the word. Yes, I am an artist. I can call it art. The definition
[Guest]: of art is changing now so quickly because artists are able to reach so many people and
[Guest]: find success through so many channels on Instagram, YouTube, blah, blah, blah, TikTok. So there
[Guest]: is no one ladder. There is no single definition. This allows more people to own this term.
[Guest]: But what I'm trying to say is that I think the real purpose of art is just this. Like
[Guest]: art is not supposed to be the job of an elite minority. Art is not about that, like you
[Guest]: compare it to writing. And that's a very interesting comparison. Because to me, writing is fun
[Guest]: after having done it. It's nice that I feel great the rest of the day having got it out
[Guest]: of me. But getting it out of me is an excruciating process. And I flip tabs and I do all kinds
[Guest]: of terrible, wrong things that Da Vinci could never have done. But I'm doing them. And when
[Guest]: I'm drawing, I'm not. So art is different from drawing from writing for me very much
[Guest]: because the joy of it is in the doing of it. And the result does not matter. I get the
[Guest]: same joy from the drawing I do today, as the drawing I did the first time I did it when
[Guest]: I went outside to draw, I look at the drawing and it's not as good. Obviously, I've really
[Guest]: become a much better artist in four, five years. But the level of joy is the same. And
[Guest]: it is very, very high. Once you tap into this idea, the reason why this is a good exercise
[Guest]: is not so that you become an artist, nevermind becoming an artist, don't don't draw all the
[Guest]: time, don't ever think about ever becoming good at it or selling. It's just a good idea
[Guest]: to get used to this habit, that some things are good just to do. Some things are good
[Guest]: just to do because spending time in a good way is a good idea. Getting used to this notion
[Guest]: that there are some things you can find joy from just in doing them is a very useful notion
[Guest]: because then you start to seek it in other avenues in your life maybe. And that is how
[Guest]: you become a better person. You start to understand that some activities can bring me joy. Maybe
[Guest]: I should look for some other activities that are similar to this and you will find it for
[Guest]: a while running to me felt like the joy is only after the run. But now the process of
[Guest]: the run is the joy even with aching limbs and everything. The time I spend running is
[Guest]: beautiful me time that I just enjoy. And incidentally, it is also you time because I'm often listening
[Guest]: to your podcast while I run. But this idea, this concept that you should do things which
[Guest]: bring you joy. It's amazing how easy it is to get used to it once you do a few drawings.
[Guest]: And hopefully you carry it into other spheres of your life as well.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, it also makes me sort of think about the notion of joy. Like I think a lot
[Amit Varma]: of things that we take happiness from, we take happiness from looking back at them,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we'll remember a certain time, and we'll say, Oh, I was happy then. But the point
[Amit Varma]: is, if you were not in the moment, then, then you were nothing, you were not happy or sad
[Amit Varma]: or whatever shit was happening. And now in the looking back, you're finding the happiness.
[Amit Varma]: So there is a kind of happiness where you're almost forcing yourself to be happy, you look
[Amit Varma]: back on that and say, Oh, you know, I had such a lovely conversation with so and so
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, and that makes you happy. But then there's another kind of happiness, which
[Amit Varma]: is something that, you know, I wish I could have more of in my life where you're just
[Amit Varma]: happy in the moment, where the rest of that shit doesn't matter with the narratives you
[Amit Varma]: build around yourself don't matter at all. And I know what you mean by running because
[Amit Varma]: like a couple of years ago, I was like 20 kgs lighter and I was running and stuff. I
[Amit Varma]: remember running a 10k and I get some of that where initially like I remember one of the
[Amit Varma]: interesting things that made me you know, stay with running after I got into it was
[Amit Varma]: that every morning you might get up and there'll be many days where you think that hey, I don't
[Amit Varma]: want to run today. But after you run, you're always glad you ran every single time there
[Amit Varma]: was not a single time that I regretted going out to run today, right? You just know that
[Amit Varma]: after the run, you'll be glad that you ran. And so I completely kind of get that analogy
[Amit Varma]: and does it then demand that you live a different kind of life? Like there is one kind of life
[Amit Varma]: where you're completely in the moment, you're drawing something or you're running, or maybe
[Amit Varma]: you're playing an instrument or whatever it is, but you're completely in the moment. And
[Amit Varma]: there's another kind of life where you are focused either on the past or the future,
[Amit Varma]: where for example, you might be trying to sell your art, you might be trying to chatting
[Amit Varma]: with a publisher and deciding publishing details or you might be talking to an event organizer
[Amit Varma]: and saying, hey, I'll come there and do this live drawing and all of that. And these seem
[Amit Varma]: therefore almost opposed to each other than the purest form of living, it would seem to
[Amit Varma]: me at one level is to ignore the hustle entirely, and just do the drawing. And you don't just
[Amit Varma]: do that you also do the other stuff. In fact, you know, after the break, one of the themes
[Amit Varma]: that I want to ask you a lot about is this sort of dual life that an artist like you
[Amit Varma]: lives where you're not just an artist, but you're also a salesman of your own art. You're
[Amit Varma]: also an entrepreneur of your own brand, right, which are all impressive to me, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I'd love to be able to do the same things. But what are you really living for? And at
[Amit Varma]: one level and not as in what are you trying to live for? But as a general question, it
[Amit Varma]: would seem to me that you already have that what you're trying to live for, which is just
[Amit Varma]: being present in that moment and having that joy.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, absolutely. I think the reason why I draw is the same reason by another urban
[Guest]: sketcher who might be a lawyer or an architect draws, we are getting that joy in the moment.
[Guest]: Maybe the argument would then be that it helps the rest of life to go by to know that you
[Guest]: have this source of pure joy, you can do some other things just for the work, you can do
[Guest]: some other things for not the same kind of rewards, you are getting your rewards or your
[Guest]: nice dopamine from this one activity. The Marwadi instinct in me is that of a salesman,
[Guest]: but I hate it. I hate doing it. I don't like I get I get a kick out of it. But sometimes
[Guest]: I feel like I'd rather not. I hate thinking about money. Again, very wrong instinct considering
[Guest]: who I am. But I hate thinking about I hate thinking about money. And I'm terrible at
[Guest]: thinking about money and working with money and investing and just horrible at it. Never
[Guest]: know how much money I'm carrying or what I should do with it, etc. But being an artist,
[Guest]: I get certain joys from this act of being an artist. And that puts me in a frame of
[Guest]: mind where I feel like, okay, now I can do some of the work work things, the quote unquote
[Guest]: work things which are not the same, because I have done this. And now I want to take and
[Guest]: my business is being an artist. So therefore, my business is again related to the thing
[Guest]: that I got joy from which is my art. But if I was not an artist, if I was just doing this,
[Guest]: I feel like this would make me simply a calmer person in the rest of my life. This I have
[Guest]: this source for whenever I need pure joy, I get it from here. Now I can get on with
[Guest]: the rest of my life and get whatever else I get from that.
[Amit Varma]: Superb. Let's take a quick commercial break now. And after the break, we'll come back
[Amit Varma]: to the story of your life and begin where we left off at Chicago.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more? I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading
[Amit Varma]: habit. This means that I read more books, but I also read more long form articles and
[Amit Varma]: essays. There's a world of knowledge available through the internet. But the problem we all
[Amit Varma]: face is how do we navigate this knowledge? How do we know what to read? How do we put
[Amit Varma]: the right incentives in place? Well, I discovered one way, a couple of friends of mine run this
[Amit Varma]: awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com, which aims to help people up level themselves
[Amit Varma]: by reading more. A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called the Daily
[Amit Varma]: Reader. Every day for six months, they sent me a long form article to read. The subjects
[Amit Varma]: covered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models and marmalade. This helped
[Amit Varma]: me build a habit of reading. At the end of every day, I understood the world a little
[Amit Varma]: better than I did before. So if you want to build your reading habit, head on over to
[Amit Varma]: CTQ Compounds and check out their Daily Reader. New batches start every month. They also have
[Amit Varma]: a great program called Future Stack, which helps you stay up to date with ideas, skills
[Amit Varma]: and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future. Future Stack batches
[Amit Varma]: start every Saturday. Also check out their Social Capital Compound, which helps you master
[Amit Varma]: social media. What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2500 rupees, 2500 if you use
[Amit Varma]: the discount code UNSEEN. So head on over to CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com and use
[Amit Varma]: the code UNSEEN. Up level yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with sneaky artist, Nishant Jain.
[Amit Varma]: You know, Nishant, I should have, you know, randomly cornered you somewhere and recorded
[Amit Varma]: this conversation with you without your knowing it was being recorded. Now that would have
[Amit Varma]: been sneaky and most kind of appropriate. So, you know, while digressing all over the
[Amit Varma]: place, we got enough through the linear journey of your life to find you in Chicago where
[Amit Varma]: you've to locate you in Chicago where you've decided that man, I want to be a writer and
[Amit Varma]: you know, this pyramid is not for me. I want to do the things that I love. The universe
[Amit Varma]: has given me permission as it were, and you move on to that. Now that's writer and then
[Amit Varma]: you become a sneaky artist. So take me through a little bit of that journey about drawing
[Amit Varma]: like were you into drawing from before that? How was all of that kind of working out?
[Guest]: So like most children, I was drawing and I was encouraged to draw but also like most
[Guest]: children when they grow up, drawing is something that kids do. So you stop doing it. So I stopped
[Guest]: doing it like we were speaking before I started drawing these webcomics which were in my limited
[Guest]: ability of the time I was doing stick figures. They were quick turnaround like I have a joke
[Guest]: I can draw it and realize it in 30 minutes and post it. And instead of Facebook in those
[Guest]: days was very generous, not like the Facebook it is today, I could reach my whole audience
[Guest]: and I did fairly well for myself. Now when I was at this juncture in Chicago, my idea
[Guest]: was that I'm a writer and I'm a cartoonist. And now that I'm doing this full time, both
[Guest]: of these things, I owe it to myself to do them better. And I had ambitions as a cartoonist
[Guest]: because I've also read graphic novels and I wanted to draw incredible deep things. Basically,
[Guest]: I wanted to tell stories that stick figures could not do justice to. I needed my figures
[Guest]: to be recognizable. I needed them to be distinct. I needed to draw worlds that resembled actual
[Guest]: worlds, not just have them suspended in white ether. So I needed to learn how to draw. And
[Guest]: I tried to do these different things I did. Actually, before I became an urban sketcher
[Guest]: before sneaky art, I did this thing on Reddit. There's this subreddit called Reddit gets
[Guest]: drawn in which people post interesting photos of themselves and artists of various persuasions.
[Guest]: They make portraits and they post it, you get upvoted and a lot of artists are there.
[Guest]: So as an aspiring artist, it is good because you see a reference photo and you see 20 realizations
[Guest]: of it in different styles. And as an aspiring artist, if you contribute, you get nice comments,
[Guest]: you get feedback. It's a very thriving subreddit. I drew maybe 400 portraits in like a year.
[Guest]: Like I would sit in one sitting, I would make five portraits in half an hour. So quickly,
[Guest]: quickly, quickly. And this is a function of my inclinations that I draw quickly, that
[Guest]: I wanted to do things in one go. I didn't want to do layers and layers. I can think
[Guest]: of it as lazy, but who you are sort of informs the art you make. And it's good to lean into
[Guest]: who you are. And I'll touch upon that a little later. But I wanted to be a better artist.
[Guest]: And I knew that this needs me to draw more and more. I'm learning some skills from doing
[Guest]: these Reddit gets drawn portraits, but that's not enough. Like I need to know how to draw
[Guest]: cities and nothing is working. I need to put in the hours and I don't know how. So I needed
[Guest]: to find things that I could merge together. And Chicago was perfect for that. I loved
[Guest]: the city. I wanted to explore it. How do I explore it? Let's take a sketchbook and I'll
[Guest]: have a reason to explore it. So I will get this kick of exploring the city. But the way
[Guest]: to really look at it would be that I draw it. So I will keep drawing because the idea
[Guest]: is that I will go out with a sketchbook and I'll look at things and I'll draw the interesting
[Guest]: things I see. So if I combine my love for this and exploration of the city with drawing,
[Guest]: I'll build a sustainable drawing habit and eventually surely I will learn how to draw.
[Guest]: That was the idea. Now, one more thing I did in this pursuit was one rule I set for myself
[Guest]: is that I will draw with a pen and I had a fountain pen, which is the fountain pen I
[Guest]: use today. And I will draw with this fountain pen, not a pencil because I have a perfectionist
[Guest]: nature or a very exacting nature and I'm very cruel on myself. So I never finish things.
[Guest]: I just keep erasing and redoing. And I needed to turn the page metaphorically and literally.
[Guest]: So fountain pen ink on paper, no steps backwards. Every line I draw is there in full contrast.
[Guest]: So I can only finish drawings. I can't change them. And I can only draw again if I want
[Guest]: to improve and draw more if I want to improve. So this was a constraint I set upon myself.
[Guest]: Another theme I come in my podcast very often and we should talk about it again is constraints
[Guest]: bring freedom. They don't restrict you. They set you free. And I talk about how that this
[Guest]: manifests in different ways as an artist and how useful it is. But so I'm doing this. I'm
[Guest]: walking around Chicago and I'm drawing things in my sketchbook with a pen. Not very well,
[Guest]: but doing it every day. And I am a little not ashamed is not the word, but it's a little
[Guest]: ridiculous. I think I'm a grown adult. It's too late for me to learn to draw. And I'm
[Guest]: how am I going to explain this to anyone? What if they look at me? What do they last?
[Guest]: What are you doing? What will I say? I'm trying to learn how to draw. Like I'm a grown adult
[Guest]: who quit his job and is now trying to walk around drawing things. They laugh or I'll
[Amit Varma]: think I think they laugh. I think one of the things people don't realize is that there
[Guest]: is no such thing as a grown adult. No adult is grown. We're all just winging it. Yeah.
[Guest]: So but when you make a nice practice out of beating yourself up, then all of these things
[Guest]: are the tools you use. So why not? So I wanted to hide. I'll go and I'll draw and I'll draw
[Guest]: quickly and I'll just get out of there before they see me. I will be sneaky. So the first
[Guest]: idea I had of sneaky art, the first definition I had of this word, and it has evolved since
[Guest]: then. So sneaky art 1.0 is that I am sneaky looking for art and I draw and within half
[Guest]: an hour before I'm conspicuous, I'm gone. And I kept doing this. And this is how I sort
[Guest]: of learned how to draw better. I merged it with the love of the city and exploring the
[Guest]: city full of fantastic, crazy people. And what happened therefore also is that I realized
[Guest]: what are the things I like looking at? What are the things that catch my eye? And this
[Guest]: is such a nice thing to learn about yourself. Like what do you find interesting as a person?
[Guest]: And I didn't explicitly realize it at the time, but this is such a fantastic way to
[Guest]: become an artist, to know what you want to draw. All these years as a child and as a
[Guest]: young adult, when I was practicing how to draw, there were these how to draw books.
[Guest]: Usme you have eyes with hyper-realistic detail. Usme you have body anatomies in hyper-realistic
[Guest]: detail. You have birds and animals. These are incidentally none of the things I can
[Guest]: draw even today. I can't draw birds and animals. I can't draw hyper-realistic eyes and feet
[Guest]: and legs. I'm bad at it, but I'm a decently well-to-do artist who can't draw these basic
[Guest]: things because there's not a single way to become an artist. And from doing it this way,
[Guest]: from feeling like an outsider, forcing himself in, I chanced upon this thing. I'll only learn
[Guest]: if I keep drawing more and I'll only draw more if I draw the things I like. And by doing
[Guest]: this, I'm finding out, oh, these are the things I like. When I flip through the sketchbook,
[Guest]: I'm like, oh, this is what I look at. Oh, this is what I look at. Oh, this is what I
[Guest]: found interesting in this space over here when I could have also been looking at this
[Guest]: other thing. Specifically, what kind of things surprised
[Guest]: you about the way you look? Yeah, so this was to do with being an immigrant
[Guest]: here, right? So I'm trying to understand this world, how it works. And I found the things
[Guest]: that fascinated me were the people. So you have this city where the temperature goes
[Guest]: from minus 40 to plus 40. 80 degrees of difference happens over the course of a year. And no
[Guest]: matter the temperature, these people go about their lives. I came upon this understanding
[Guest]: of what is a city. So a city, if you think about it, has no reason to exist. It has only
[Guest]: one reason to exist. A city exists because humans need things. We want to get from A
[Guest]: to B. So there are roads. We want to get there efficiently. So there are buses on these roads
[Guest]: and there are bus stops. We might need money. So there are ATM machines and sometimes we
[Guest]: get tired. So there are cafes with coffees and there are places for lunch. So all of
[Guest]: these things are not natural things. They exist because of human need. And this is what
[Guest]: I was understanding. What is the way that people interact with things in their cities?
[Guest]: How do people live in a city? What is the function of a city and how do people use these
[Guest]: various functions to get about their day? So I was fascinated by just the sea of humanity
[Guest]: you see at a metro station. These are all people from different social classes, different
[Guest]: economic classes, getting into this train to go from A to B. In this moment, we are
[Guest]: all together. We are all trying to do the same thing. We don't know each other. We're
[Guest]: not looking at each other. We're not speaking to each other. We don't want anything to do
[Guest]: with each other maybe. But we are united in this common purpose and therefore this train
[Guest]: exists. I was thinking about how tall buildings are. And a building is only tall if there
[Guest]: is a human next to it. So I came upon this set of questions. Is a cafe a cafe if there
[Guest]: is no person drinking coffee inside it? What makes it a cafe is the person drinking coffee
[Guest]: inside it. I came upon this question when I was drawing a cafe. Realized that it is
[Guest]: until the point that I draw a person with a coffee, this is just an interior space.
[Guest]: Is it a mug unless there is coffee in it? It's just this thing made of ceramic. We give
[Guest]: it purpose. We give it value. We give it context. And that is how these things, a building is
[Guest]: tall because humans are six feet or five feet tall. And a building is so many times taller
[Amit Varma]: than us. That's what makes it tall. It's not just tall.
[Amit Varma]: At this point, there's a lovely poem by Vijay Shishadri I'll read out called Imaginary Number.
[Amit Varma]: Have you read this? I have not.
[Amit Varma]: Okay. Imaginary Number by Vijay Shishadri. The mountain that remains when the universe
[Amit Varma]: is destroyed is not big and is not small. Big and small are comparative categories.
[Amit Varma]: And to what could the mountain that remains when the universe is destroyed be compared?
[Amit Varma]: This observes and is appeased. The soul scrambles across the screes. The scroll, like the square
[Amit Varma]: root of minus one, is an impossibility that has its uses.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, I remembered the mountain at the end of the universe.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, it's it's beautiful because I found myself thinking along these lines, the
[Guest]: more I did these things, that this exists because I am looking at it. This has meaning
[Guest]: because this random person came in here looking for a coffee. So this person is integral.
[Guest]: If I want to say that I drew a cafe, I need to draw this person here who ordered the coffee
[Guest]: and is drinking it.
[Guest]: And this taught me more about myself. Firstly, it begins without articulation. You just look
[Guest]: at something and you're interested, you find it curious. So if you walk through a city,
[Guest]: you observed a bunch of things, maybe you took pictures of a bunch of things on camera,
[Guest]: but there is a filter here. You take a picture already with the idea of is this thing worth
[Guest]: taking a picture of worth to whom, to me or to someone else?
[Guest]: You might think, is it something worth sharing on Instagram? So again, you immediately externalized
[Guest]: to outside standards. Is this worth sharing on Instagram? Therefore, if it's not, I don't
[Guest]: need to notice it. I don't need to take a picture of it. But as an artist, I was spending
[Guest]: more and more time just without explicitly articulating it, just trying to discover what
[Guest]: excites me. If I looked at something, I would tell myself, okay, give it 10 minutes and
[Guest]: let's draw it. And in the process of drawing it, I would discover what I find beautiful
[Guest]: about it. And therefore, in the process of this repeated exercise, I would find out these
[Guest]: are the things that I find beautiful.
[Guest]: And this made me a better person over time. And I found this such a useful exercise. So
[Guest]: I did it more and more. I did this project called 30 days of Chicago, every day, new
[Guest]: side of Chicago and every day a drawing. And I kept going after that even like I just kept
[Guest]: drawing more and more and more things. And I posted something on Reddit on the Chicago
[Guest]: subreddit that I sat in this place and I saw the beautiful skyline of Chicago here it is.
[Guest]: And somebody reached out and said, do you sell prints? And this was a very crazy moment
[Guest]: for me, because up until this moment, I was thinking of myself as a cartoonist or a comic
[Guest]: artist. And the idea was that even if I draw well, the thing will sell because I will say
[Guest]: something witty or funny or profound next to it, there will be a word bubble, there
[Guest]: will be a dialogue, there will be a caption. The idea that someone could want just the
[Guest]: art for what it is did not ever occur to me. And it was it took me aback that they just
[Guest]: literally just the drawing, you want my drawing, I just drew it. I just sat for half an hour,
[Guest]: you want that and you will you'll pay me for it. And I sold it. And after that, I got a
[Guest]: few requests on Instagram. And this thing kept happening. And I came to this understanding
[Guest]: that I was in this new place. These people don't know me. They don't care that I wrote
[Guest]: for this YouTube channel in India. They don't know that I had a blog. What are they seeing
[Guest]: me as if I keep calling myself a writer cartoonist? They think I'm what am I talking about? They
[Guest]: don't even understand it because they know me for sneaky art. More and more people are
[Guest]: knowing me for sneaky art, and they don't know this other side of me. Am I now an artist?
[Guest]: I had to kind of rationalize that this reality that if people see know me as only for my
[Guest]: art, and they want my art and I'm selling art, do I get to use this word artist now?
[Guest]: And I was so hesitant, like this word held all these various meanings in my head, which
[Guest]: I felt I wasn't qualified to use. I learned to accept it over time that I guess I'm an
[Guest]: artist slash writer. I also write but I guess primarily I draw because yeah, that's what
[Guest]: I'm doing every day. I'm not writing every day anymore. I'm just drawing every day. And
[Guest]: I'm getting so much out of it that I keep doing it. Then we move to Wisconsin. And suddenly
[Guest]: I was drawing in Wisconsin and there was not those iconic sites. So there aren't photogenic
[Guest]: things anymore. Now what do I draw? And now I discovered that now in a more concentrated
[Guest]: form my art is telling me who I am. Because now those external things are gone. They aren't
[Guest]: Instagram worthy sites. Hashtag Chicago can't be used. Hashtag Eau Claire or hashtag Wisconsin
[Guest]: is what I use. Not a big hashtag. Not so many people care about it. It's not so iconic.
[Guest]: I don't get the same likes. So those external factors of choosing this subject are gone.
[Guest]: Now why did I draw this thing? And I realized more and more that this is about me. And this
[Guest]: is about my artistic journey. So I started doing it from a new perspective now. Now I'm
[Guest]: doing it because I'm in this new part of the world whose mental picture I only have from
[Guest]: watching that 70s show when I was a kid. That's all I know what Wisconsin might be like. And
[Guest]: I feel like such a stranger. And maybe if I draw things, I will feel a little more comfortable.
[Guest]: The only excuse I have for sitting in this cafe for one hour, not feel awkward and out
[Guest]: of place is if I have my sketchbook. Sketchbook was sort of holding me there. Observation
[Guest]: was making me at that same time bond with people from a distance. Like, yeah, I ordered
[Guest]: that coffee. They ordered the same coffee. This is how I might have sat at a cafe with
[Guest]: a friend the way that they are sitting here. When I would go to the park in summer and
[Guest]: I would see people sprawled on the grass and I'm enjoying the grass in the same way and
[Guest]: I'm watching them and I'm making a drawing or something like that from a distance. It
[Guest]: made me feel all these common things that we have. I might not have sat on the grass
[Guest]: for an hour in the park if I didn't have my sketchbook. I would just feel self-conscious
[Guest]: out of place and I would leave. But this sketchbook gave me the mandate to do this thing. And
[Guest]: sneaky art became this other thing that I reached sneaky art 2.0. So this other thing
[Guest]: was that sneaky art exists. Everywhere. In plain sight. It is sneaky. It needs you to
[Guest]: look for it. Once you start to look at it, you see it everywhere. It has to be believed
[Guest]: to be seen. It's not about me being sneaky anymore. It's now about me being the observer
[Guest]: who waits patiently for these magical moments to happen. So I was looking for what I described
[Guest]: as moments of accidental art. So when you're at a cafe and two people are talking and right
[Guest]: behind them, someone comes to place another order at the counter and this juxtaposition
[Guest]: of three figures happens. It's this moment, you know, these worlds have collided. Two
[Guest]: people are at a cafe. They are talking to each other. That's two worlds colliding. And
[Guest]: then this other person comes and just from my vantage, my point of view, they make this
[Guest]: composition, three people, one person standing tall, two people in the foreground, and this
[Guest]: triangle is formed just from my point of view. If I sat somewhere else, it might have looked
[Guest]: different. But just from this point of view, it exists in this beautiful artistic moment.
[Guest]: My job as a sneaky artist is to register this moment before it is lost. So I make it my
[Guest]: job now to walk around and capture these moments out of the relentlessly changing flux of life
[Guest]: in busy places. These moments of accidental art.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about how your art itself sort of evolved through these processes like, you
[Amit Varma]: know, one of your newsletter posts, I came across this pro tip where you write, quote,
[Amit Varma]: to draw quickly begin with what is most interesting, put it in the middle, then radiate outwards
[Amit Varma]: for as long as you're interested. And I'll, you know, link that post, obviously from the
[Amit Varma]: show notes. And there's actually a video where you sort of show yourself drawing, you put
[Amit Varma]: something in the middle and you kind of radiate outwards at another point where you write
[Amit Varma]: about this phrase, which you use a lot in your posts, tiny people, and you write quote,
[Amit Varma]: there's a philosophy to drawing tiny people akin to phenomenology, I strip away the layers
[Amit Varma]: of obfuscation and distill every person to the essential lines, I remove all that separates
[Amit Varma]: them from me and leave only the things we universally recognize the art of tiny people
[Amit Varma]: brings us to the things themselves. And then you have a link to a post which explains that.
[Amit Varma]: So I imagine that at some level, does it then involve trying to draw less, just getting,
[Amit Varma]: you know, more minimal, trying to draw less trying to capture the essence. And then this
[Amit Varma]: also brings me to the question of, like at one level for an artist for a visual artist,
[Amit Varma]: there is a pressure of fidelity, how accurately am I capturing something does what I am drawing
[Amit Varma]: look like the real thing in front of me. But at some point, I guess this begins to shift
[Amit Varma]: towards just capturing the essence of it. Because what is fidelity? I mean, everybody's
[Amit Varma]: looking at everything in a different way. You know, what do you see of it? So how did
[Guest]: your thinking and your art evolve around all this? Yeah, yeah. So you've touched on two
[Guest]: points of, like, these are two things that I use to inform my raw thinking. So when I
[Guest]: got into this business of articulating myself, so when I started the newsletter, it the idea
[Guest]: of the newsletter was that every week, I need to talk about my drawings. What do I need
[Guest]: to say? I don't know. But I need to get better at talking about communicating my art. This
[Guest]: was part of being in the business of selling art, which I started in Wisconsin. And we'll
[Guest]: go into that rewind to that a little later. But the idea of phenomenology then came to
[Guest]: me because I'm reading about these various ideas. And I read this book, which was recommended
[Guest]: by our group, incidentally, it's called the it's called at the existentialist cafe by
[Guest]: Sarah Bakewell. And it's a fantastic book, which introduced me to the concept of phenomenology,
[Guest]: which is that learning to see things as they are, and not through the way that we recognize
[Guest]: them. And this was something that philosophers did in order to, in order to see things without
[Guest]: judgment. But I realized that this is what I do as an artist all the time. This is the
[Guest]: way to draw difficult things to not be intimidated by what I know it looks like. So if I'm drawing
[Guest]: someone's face, if I get into this loop in my mind of own the nose, the nose looks like
[Guest]: this. And I run through all these images of the nose in my mind, I don't draw what is
[Guest]: in front of me, I draw what is in my head of what a nose should look like, and my best
[Guest]: representation of it. So I have to do what is in front of me. So I have to reject the
[Guest]: notions of it that I had before, I have to see it very carefully, but I have to not recognize
[Guest]: it. Therefore, I have to see the things as they are, not as I know them. And this vibed
[Guest]: with phenomenology in a beautiful way, like I thought it was just perfect how it synced.
[Guest]: That's why I sort of articulated it in this manner. The minimalism though, is a function
[Guest]: of me. I don't think that is a necessary prerequisite of art. That is just me with my inclinations
[Guest]: and my idiosyncrasies. I'm a mechanical engineer, we optimize, I want to say more with less,
[Guest]: I am a lazy person, I optimize, I want to say more with less work. I am a sneaky artist,
[Guest]: I have less time. So I do not have the luxury of drawing things with millions of lines.
[Guest]: Not to mention, I want to capture what is it that I'm interested by, I want to capture
[Guest]: transient human activity. I can't afford to take time because it is gone. And I'm going
[Guest]: to capture it while it is there in front of me. So I needed to minimize my lines. And
[Guest]: I needed to say more with less lines because I needed to draw those things very quickly.
[Guest]: So the idea of starting at a point of interest was crucial. It's a case of form follows function.
[Guest]: I'm trying to draw these things. I'm trying to draw a person who might leave any moment
[Guest]: in a train, I don't know which stop they'll get off at, it could be the next stop. What
[Guest]: do I need to do in order to make this not a pointless drawing? Why did I want to draw
[Guest]: that person? I'm going to start there. This happened because I needed to draw quickly,
[Guest]: but it therefore trained me to learn to spot what it is that caught my interest. Now I
[Guest]: can explicitly immediately see this is what catches my interest because I've done it half
[Guest]: a million times I've done this with people I have looked at somebody tried to draw them
[Guest]: and they left and it was incomplete. But I could see where I started and why I started
[Guest]: there that is a good part of my artistic process start at the point of interest and the point
[Guest]: of greatest interest so that even if the person is lost, I have got something that I wanted.
[Guest]: Even if it's not a complete drawing, I have got something that I wanted from it. This
[Guest]: was it satisfied my craving of having done that drawing. So the speed is also a function
[Guest]: of the situation. The minimalism is also a function of the situation. This idea of tiny
[Guest]: people is a useful exercise in this. So tiny people drawings are made at traffic lights.
[Guest]: I'm sitting in a corner cafe looking at people at a traffic intersection. 10 seconds, maybe
[Guest]: if I'm lucky, I get 15 seconds, then they're gone. How can I capture a human form in that
[Guest]: little time looking, starting to draw, finishing to draw and then they're gone. All of this
[Guest]: happens and there is no time for hesitation. There isn't only instinct. Ancillary effect
[Guest]: of this is you learn to trust your instinct. So I ask participants in my workshops to do
[Guest]: speed drawing, not because speed drawing is an end in itself. I don't want you to be speed
[Guest]: artists, but I need you to be quick to identify what interests you. I need you to be quick
[Guest]: to identify over time why it interests you. And I need you to be quick at seeing. You
[Guest]: need to see faster. You need to register more things at first glance. And that these are
[Guest]: useful habits, whether after that you take three hours or three weeks to compose a piece,
[Guest]: it doesn't matter. But all these skills are useful skills for you to have, to be able
[Guest]: to zero in on what is your interest. This will make you a better artist. Don't try to
[Guest]: draw these things that you don't want to draw. There is no single standard of art anymore.
[Guest]: Just draw what you want to draw. You look at my tiny people drawings. There are no feet.
[Guest]: I don't like to draw shoes, so I don't draw shoes. Their legs end as stumps, so to say.
[Guest]: It's my style now. Style is also something that develops in this way. Style develops
[Guest]: when we lean into these things that are our idiosyncrasies. So there's this quote that
[Guest]: I share in my blog posts and my podcast often. It's by my favorite musician, Miles Davis.
[Guest]: He says, once is a mistake, twice is an idea, three times is style. So we think that as
[Guest]: creatives, our job is to erase our mistakes. By drawing with a pen, I could not erase my
[Guest]: mistakes. By drawing quickly, I did not have the chance to think about my mistakes. I could
[Guest]: only move forward. And by doing this again and again and again, and insisting on drawing
[Guest]: what I care about, I developed more ideas about what is it that I like? What is it that
[Guest]: I don't like? If I have only 10 minutes, why should I draw the things I don't like? What
[Guest]: if I didn't draw the things I don't like? What if I only drew the things I like? Can
[Guest]: that be a completed piece also? Let's see. I'll do it today. I'll do it again tomorrow.
[Guest]: Let's see what happens if I do it 50 times. This is how you develop style. These ideas
[Guest]: reiterated so many times over so many pages, never stepping back, never editing is what
[Guest]: developed into what eventually became my style. And I honestly have thought about the word
[Guest]: style for so many years. And I've always thought it's too late. Like you have style or you
[Guest]: don't. Like I can't develop a style anymore. I'm too old for that. Like you have to be
[Guest]: a genius to have your own style. And I remember the first time I was with an urban sketchers
[Guest]: group in Minneapolis. And someone said to me that, you know, I can identify your drawing
[Guest]: immediately you have a distinct style. And that's the first time it occurred to me that
[Guest]: wow, I have a style. How did this happen? It came from following these first principles
[Guest]: and which were all necessary to my inclinations and my ideas and my circumstances that that
[Guest]: became what it became. And that led to tiny people that led to understanding what draws
[Guest]: me to tiny people. So the word Sonder, the ideas of existentialism, even the quote by
[Guest]: by Sartre about hell is other people. That's such a beautiful, insightful quote. And it's
[Amit Varma]: so important to me how that works. Yeah, thinking about style is interesting. Like just thinking
[Amit Varma]: aloud it strikes me that look at one level, all of us are exactly the same. You know,
[Amit Varma]: what appear to be differences between us are differences of happenstance in terms of slight
[Amit Varma]: tweaks in our genetic code. And, you know, the circumstances around us, the small differences
[Amit Varma]: in nature and nurture, as it were. And therefore, it could be argued that these differences
[Amit Varma]: might appear as weaknesses, because they don't fit in with whatever, you know, the average
[Amit Varma]: view of the world is. But see, in another way, they are what make us unique, perhaps
[Amit Varma]: by accident, but they are the style. You know, this chess tournament called Tata India, just
[Amit Varma]: got over in Calcutta, in fact, your home city, your hometown, and your home city, sorry,
[Amit Varma]: I shouldn't call it a town, Bengalis everywhere will be mad at me. Omito mito, half Bengali,
[Amit Varma]: we thought you're one of us. The Blitz section was won by a guy called Levon Aronian. And
[Amit Varma]: he was being asked about the tournament where he was trying to explain that he played badly.
[Amit Varma]: And he was sort of talking about how he played badly and he made so many mistakes. He was
[Amit Varma]: being interviewed by this guy called Sagar Shah and Sagar asked him that, do you feel
[Amit Varma]: bad about the mistakes you made? And he said, No, I feel not bad about the mistakes I made
[Amit Varma]: because they're old mistakes. They are who I am. And it's obviously a matter of concern
[Amit Varma]: that I'm repeating them. But I'm glad that they're old mistakes and there are no new
[Amit Varma]: mistakes. So the question that sprung to my mind was the one Sagar now asked that aren't
[Amit Varma]: you, you know, concerned that old mistakes are popping up again? And he said, No, because
[Amit Varma]: I know them, you know, they're familiar to me, they are who I am, in the sense that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, some people will have a knee problem, some people will have a back problem, you'll
[Amit Varma]: have back pain, once in a while, you'll learn to manage it. And you will not get worried
[Amit Varma]: if the back pain springs up, because it's part of you and you'll learn to manage it
[Amit Varma]: again. But if some new problem happens somewhere, like you get a heart attack, then that's a
[Amit Varma]: problem. So if it's an old weakness, I don't kind of mind it because I know how to control
[Amit Varma]: it, I've controlled it before, which struck me as a very profound point, because my assumption
[Amit Varma]: would have been that what you want to do is you want to eliminate the old mistakes. And
[Amit Varma]: if you make new mistakes, and you eliminate them after that, and it's a linear process.
[Amit Varma]: But his point is, once you settle into like, what is your style, your style is a way you
[Amit Varma]: think, given a form, right? And if you think in a particular way, you think in a particular
[Amit Varma]: way, it is who you are, I guess, in your case, some of the things which would be considered
[Amit Varma]: style like the minimalism or, you know, drawing stumps, because you don't like shoes, you
[Amit Varma]: know, others could look at them and call them weaknesses and say, Hey, you can't do hyper
[Amit Varma]: realistic eyes. But your style is what it is. And these weaknesses would have pushed
[Amit Varma]: you, I suppose, into an area of strength, where you can just take one look and kind
[Amit Varma]: of locate the essence of something and put that down quickly before the person gets up
[Guest]: to exactly. So in my urban sketching community, there are many artists who this is another
[Guest]: recurring topic of conversation on the show, even in person with other urban sketchers
[Guest]: that you can sit side by side with somebody on the same bench, look in the same direction,
[Guest]: and draw entirely different things. Because of our inclinations, because of our skills,
[Guest]: and because of everything being a function of the way you draw, right? So like you mentioned,
[Guest]: I draw quickly, and somebody draws hyper realistically. So what that means to me, as an advantage
[Guest]: part of it is that there are opportunities to draw that occur to me that do not even
[Guest]: occur to them. I make drawings when I'm standing in a queue, like five minutes, maybe and we're
[Guest]: done. But I'll draw quickly with a pen and I'll finish a drawing in that time. But that's
[Guest]: not even enough time for them to get out their things, get out their tools. So that is not
[Guest]: a situation in which they can draw. Those are not subjects they can ever capture. Only
[Guest]: I can capture them because of the temporal nature of those transient nature of those
[Guest]: subjects and those scenes. So there is the disadvantage, you can argue that all the realism
[Guest]: is lost, you don't have the you're not you're not representing the reality in the same way.
[Guest]: I think that's entirely unnecessary as an artist. And we should let's talk about the
[Guest]: end of art as it is called by Arthur Danto who talked about it. I see the benefit as
[Guest]: me capturing a world which is changing very quickly. And me offering something about that
[Guest]: world in my style in my way of seeing it in my way of representing it. That does the same
[Guest]: job like I spoke once Episode 15 of my podcast is with this person. He's a war illustrator.
[Guest]: So he draws in war zones. He goes to Syria and with a pot of ink and watercolors and
[Guest]: a big board with art paper on it and he sits and he paints in a war torn country in refugee
[Guest]: camps. He went to Myanmar, he went to the Eastern European border with migrants coming
[Guest]: in with in Kenya with the economic crisis. He was drawing and painting there. So I asked
[Guest]: him this thing that you're doing you're doing this stuff here. What does it matter that
[Guest]: you made a painting in Syria? Like you could have taken a photo, you could have made a
[Guest]: video, you could have broadcasted live to everybody. You could have made a TikTok video.
[Guest]: What does a painting matter in this time of multimedia content and instantaneous multimedia
[Guest]: content? You took an hour to make one scene. What like why is that good? What what uses
[Guest]: that? His answer was interesting to me. His answer was that people really look at a painting
[Guest]: and I extrapolated based on what he said because I had had thoughts like this as well. And
[Guest]: as a control engineer, I thought of information. So if you look at a picture, a picture has
[Guest]: a certain amount of information, color, shadows, details, it captures everything in its point
[Guest]: of view with an equal amount of focus. Everything is equally focused, everything is equally
[Guest]: detailed. And we live in an age where we have access to all the pictures in the world. You
[Guest]: can't really shock anyone with anything. Everybody's seen everything somewhere or the other. Nothing
[Guest]: is amazing. So this, we have reached a level of jadedness with photography. It's unfortunate
[Guest]: and it makes life very difficult for genuinely talented photographers. But people are not
[Guest]: impressed by photos anymore, the unfortunate reality of our time. What a drawing does in
[Guest]: this time, what does a simplistic drawing like mine or even his one hour representation,
[Guest]: surely he doesn't have the same details as a photograph, because he's perturbed by his
[Guest]: situation. He's not comfortable all the time. It's hot. That plays an impact on he's uncomfortable.
[Guest]: So how does that pan out in his drawings? He's afraid of what's happening around him.
[Guest]: How does that pan out in his details? He doesn't have the luxury of putting in the details
[Guest]: like a fine art painting made over weeks and months. So a lot of instantaneous momentary
[Guest]: things are captured. So it's not fully detailed. But you don't need fully detailed. What a
[Guest]: drawing does, in my opinion, this is just me thinking out and why I feel like I've sold
[Guest]: a lot of art in person and I speak to people who buy my art in front of me and I asked
[Guest]: them why. And I'm building upon those that feedback as well. Is that incomplete information
[Guest]: has a lot of value. incomplete information, which is a drawing, not a photograph, it my
[Guest]: drawing is an ink drawing of certain shapes, no colors, no shadows, so much information
[Guest]: is lost, taken away by me. What I'm offering is what I saw. So it is again filtered by
[Guest]: my personality and my skill level, no feet, only stumps. So again, my inclinations, my
[Guest]: abilities, incomplete information invites engagement. People look at it and then they
[Guest]: fill the spaces. They look at it and they imagine the colors that will go there. They
[Guest]: look at it and they see that Oh, this is what you saw. Why did you see this? They know that
[Guest]: it is your perspective. It is not the objective truth, so they don't feel threatened by it.
[Guest]: There is no insistence that this is the truth. It is implicit that this is just what I felt
[Guest]: what I saw and how I drew it. George, my guest in episode 15, he said, every illustration
[Guest]: is biased towards its subject. You could make a painting of Saddam Hussein, but the act
[Guest]: of making that painting, the act of drawing the contours of someone's face, getting the
[Guest]: colors and someone's physique and all of those things, it is an act of appreciation, not
[Guest]: of the person, but simply of the thing in front of you, the phenomenological thing in
[Guest]: front of you, like not the person you as you identify them. And that is what communicates
[Guest]: to another person when they look at a painting. So this is a very powerful thing. When you
[Guest]: get somebody to engage, you buy time. Time is the literal most powerful thing as an artist
[Guest]: that I could want. If I can get someone to spend time with something that I drew and
[Guest]: they really look at it, that's all. That's all that matters. There's this quote by Kandinsky.
[Guest]: Do you know the artist Kandinsky? I've heard of him. Yeah. So he's supposed to be the father
[Guest]: of surrealism, I think. Or maybe is it cubism? But I think surrealism. His quote is that
[Guest]: look at a painting and and I'm paraphrasing. I don't remember the quote exactly. But he
[Guest]: says that look at a painting and just lose yourself in it. If it has for a moment taken
[Guest]: you out of your world, if it has it has enabled you to move in a plane that you had never
[Guest]: seen before, what more can you ask for? The idea being that what is the purpose of art?
[Guest]: The purpose of art is only to give us that moment where we are not in our world anymore.
[Guest]: For a moment, we are in another world. It has these different rules. My world does not
[Guest]: have colors. It has only lines. My world does not have precise shapes. People like that.
[Guest]: It's a nice release from their world. It's a nice release from all this information that
[Guest]: is always assaulting our eyes. A little less information maybe but maybe a little more
[Guest]: to feel then. Makes it a little easier to feel if you take away all this burden of information.
[Guest]: So I am very firmly against the concept of realism in art as this is just an artistic
[Guest]: inclination. And this is how I feel this kind of minimalism adds value.
[Amit Varma]: So to go by Kandinsky's quote, what artists had that impact on you that you looked at
[Amit Varma]: their work and you got lost in their work?
[Guest]: Yeah, so a lot of artists who I didn't understand. So someone like Dali or Picasso, like, I don't
[Guest]: know what's happening. And this kind of fine art is interesting. You know, this kind of
[Guest]: fine art is not, we keep asking too much from it. We keep asking stupid questions like,
[Guest]: what is he trying to say? What does it mean? These are all such wrong questions like and
[Guest]: I learned that they are wrong questions from being an artist. And all this time I would
[Guest]: look at fine art and modern art and what is this? Like, what is it? What's the point?
[Guest]: Wrong question. That's not that's not the question. The job is just to experience it.
[Guest]: To suspend judgment, again, the phenomenologist, to not see things as they are to just let
[Guest]: it happen, whatever it is. Just this exercise has value. It doesn't matter what kind of
[Guest]: art it is. It doesn't matter if it's hyper realistic, it doesn't take hyper realistic
[Guest]: art. So you know, like people like Renoir, people like impressionists, not hyper realistic
[Guest]: anymore, but someone like Monet. So I was in Chicago, I was lucky enough to see some
[Guest]: of the best art in the world, Van Gogh and Monet and Rembrandt and Seurat who did pointillism.
[Guest]: And it's a different kind of appreciation. You look at it from 50 feet away, it looks
[Guest]: like something you come closer and closer and closer and the resolution breaks because
[Guest]: now you can see the brush strokes. So the shapes aren't consistent. Now you can see
[Guest]: it as a mess of color. And now you can understand it as that and then you move away again and
[Guest]: suddenly those shapes resolve into things that you recognize. So it's an experience
[Guest]: how you like it. Van Gogh is so important to me, not only for his art, but just for
[Guest]: the persistence of the artist. He had colors in his mind that he was seeing that were not
[Guest]: real. He was seeing compositions that were not real. He was seeing stars behave in a
[Guest]: way that is not real. And he was showing it to us in that way. This job, the way the artist
[Guest]: brings you into their world. One of the artists really important to me is MC Escher. And Escher
[Guest]: played tricks with you. He represented these amazing mathematical concepts in just graphical
[Guest]: prints, woodcut prints, the amount of work that takes. And he's not even a mathematician.
[Guest]: The concepts that he's talking about, the things you understand when you become a student.
[Guest]: So I sort of became a student of art in a sense in this way. I've never studied it.
[Guest]: I don't know these movements of art that exist. And I don't, I can't tell you cubism from
[Guest]: Surrealism or any of that, Dadaism, etc. I have no idea. But I just know that I look
[Guest]: at this thing, it looks interesting. Let's try and find out what this is about. I look
[Guest]: at this guy and Egon Schiele is a tragic, interesting figure. His figures, his people
[Guest]: are have these long extended limbs and these striking poses and colors. And I want to know
[Guest]: why, why did he do this? So I try to find out more about him. I find equal fascination
[Guest]: in artists 300 years old and artists who I follow on Instagram today, because it's all
[Guest]: art. It doesn't matter where it's from. If it has the power to move you, just enjoy that.
[Guest]: Enjoy being kicked a little bit out of your out of phase.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so there's this interesting story about you mentioned Surat and pointillism. So he
[Amit Varma]: had made this famous painting called a Sunday afternoon on the island of La Grande Charte.
[Amit Varma]: And there's an interesting story about it that it was at one point made into a musical
[Amit Varma]: called Sunday in the Park with George by James Lepine and Stephen Sondheim. And when Stephen
[Amit Varma]: Sondheim saw this painting for the first time, do you know what he said? What?
[Amit Varma]: Kya surat hai, kya surat hai, kya surat hai. Sorry, I had to get my one bad joke out of
[Guest]: the frame.
[Guest]: That is the famous painting of his that I saw incidentally.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, that's a famous painting of yourself.
[Guest]: It's the one of the greatest examples of pointillist art.
[Guest]: Yeah, but you didn't react like this.
[Guest]: I did not.
[Guest]: I'm very disappointed.
[Amit Varma]: I was too dignified to do that.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe since we all construct our memories anyway, maybe now in your memory, when you
[Guest]: look back after 20 years, you'll be like, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I've incepted this idea in my mind.
[Amit Varma]: I've incepted this idea.
[Amit Varma]: So now tell me a little bit about this act of painting in public.
[Amit Varma]: Like I imagine that you've mentioned how like me, you're a bit of an introvert, hell is
[Amit Varma]: other people, so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And just sitting down in public, doing something in public can bring with it great self consciousness.
[Amit Varma]: And this would be doubly so in this case, because you're actually horror of horrors,
[Amit Varma]: drawing people who are actually there, which can feel so intrusive if they see what you're
[Amit Varma]: doing, and it can be awkward with other people around you.
[Amit Varma]: So how was that evolution within you?
[Amit Varma]: Like once you started, would you just lose yourself in the drawing and forget all that?
[Amit Varma]: Or did it take a period of time to sort of be comfortable in your skin and just relax
[Guest]: and be able to do it?
[Guest]: It was really bad.
[Guest]: Initially, I thought of it as escaping.
[Guest]: I thought of it as getting away with something, which has a nice kick to it, it makes you
[Guest]: feel good, you got away with something.
[Guest]: But it's also it's not necessarily positive.
[Guest]: You don't need to feel like that.
[Guest]: What really changed things for me was when I discovered what urban sketchers are.
[Guest]: So I was doing this project 30 days of Chicago.
[Guest]: And like, it's it's incredible, like the whole serendipity of the moment serendipity is that
[Guest]: I was walking down the street, and I saw this poster on a lamppost saying urban sketchers
[Guest]: symposium.
[Guest]: And that's how I found the word urban sketcher.
[Guest]: And I googled it, and I saw this is exactly what I do.
[Guest]: There's a hashtag, I followed it.
[Guest]: And I followed these artists who are urban sketchers.
[Guest]: I tried to go to the symposium.
[Guest]: And I realized that much later, I would realize that tickets get sold out within seconds.
[Guest]: So it's impossible if the symposium was happening in, I think, a couple of months after that.
[Guest]: And I sort of gate crashed it.
[Guest]: So I they have open sketch crawls, they walk around the city drawing.
[Guest]: And I just walked along with them.
[Guest]: And I started talking to some people, and I started looking at what they're doing.
[Guest]: made friends, therefore, with urban sketchers.
[Guest]: And Chicago has a super generous, super lovely chapter of urban sketchers.
[Guest]: Urban sketching, urban sketchers are a really cool community.
[Guest]: So the one big difference is there's no hierarchy here.
[Guest]: All kinds of artists that I've spoken to interacted with who are fine artists otherwise, and also
[Guest]: urban sketchers have said this, I've confirmed this for me that usually in art circles, people
[Guest]: are protective of their styles, people are protective of what they do, they're not so
[Guest]: welcoming to outsiders that are gatekeepers, essentially, you have to prove your worth
[Guest]: to them.
[Guest]: But in this community, there is no such thing for various reasons, there is no such thing.
[Guest]: And anybody speaks to anybody, anybody learns from anybody, the teacher becomes a student,
[Guest]: the student becomes a teacher for various things.
[Guest]: As I had the opportunity to do myself, like I was a instructor at urban sketching seminar
[Guest]: in Chicago later.
[Guest]: And one of the most prominent urban sketchers of the global community was one of my students
[Guest]: in it.
[Guest]: And I felt so self conscious the whole time.
[Guest]: But she said lovely things about what I how I spoke to her and how I taught and later
[Guest]: she would be a guest on my podcast as well.
[Guest]: So once I was with these urban sketchers, and I saw somebody who is putting out a whole,
[Guest]: you know, watercolor palette on the ground on the road, sitting down on the road with
[Guest]: their sketchbook, and a jar of water and these brushes, everything laid out.
[Guest]: And it just seemed so silly that I was nervous about having a sketchbook and a pen.
[Guest]: Like, again, I needed permission.
[Guest]: They gave me permission to do this, they told me it's okay.
[Guest]: You can do this, really, really great artists do this.
[Guest]: And then I started thinking that, of course, this is what Van Gogh must have done.
[Guest]: Like how else did he paint in the fields like he didn't take a photo and go back.
[Guest]: He sat there with his things and he painted on the fields.
[Guest]: How did Rembrandt paint windmills?
[Guest]: What will he do?
[Guest]: Of course, he had to stand there and do it like there's nothing weird about standing
[Guest]: and looking and making art.
[Guest]: This is how art is made.
[Guest]: And observation of the world is not copying this idea that I was copying and I was not
[Guest]: an artist also fell away with that.
[Guest]: So I gave myself this mandate to do it that I am allowed to be outdoors, I am allowed
[Guest]: to look at people and to draw.
[Guest]: Nonetheless, at that time, I was still very conscious of it because I just I don't want
[Guest]: to explain.
[Guest]: And everybody who has ever asked me what I'm doing, whether they've come up from behind
[Guest]: at a cafe or I draw at concerts.
[Guest]: So someone I drew the musicians and somebody looked and they asked me what I'm doing.
[Guest]: It's always appreciative.
[Guest]: It's always positive comments.
[Guest]: People react positively to the act of drawing or painting.
[Guest]: They react in a way again, this is an important differentiator from photography, photography.
[Guest]: Again, if you think of information, the way it captures everything, it is an intrusion.
[Guest]: It is perceived as an invasion of privacy.
[Guest]: There are ideas around how you can take photos of people, whether you can share it or not.
[Guest]: And they are valid ideas because you are really capturing their image.
[Guest]: In a sense, that old idea, the onset of photography that you are losing a part of your soul.
[Guest]: When someone takes a photo, I can see it making sense in a twisted way in this.
[Guest]: But a drawing is always perceived as an appreciative act, as a gesture of appreciation.
[Guest]: There's no evil intent.
[Guest]: There's no nastiness involved in making a drawing of someone.
[Guest]: And so I always got positive comments.
[Guest]: Nonetheless, as a person, I just don't want to explain even the nice things.
[Guest]: Just the process of being like, oh, this is why I do it.
[Guest]: Oh, I'm an artist.
[Guest]: And I this is what I do.
[Guest]: I call myself sneaky artist.
[Guest]: It's just a conversation I would rather not have.
[Guest]: I try to not speak to people.
[Guest]: This is odd from a podcaster's point of view, but I try to minimize the number of conversations
[Guest]: I have.
[Guest]: It's just who I am as a person.
[Guest]: I live inside my own head and I think too much.
[Guest]: So it's been interesting to do this while observing people.
[Guest]: It's been interesting to want to learn about people but not speak to them.
[Guest]: And it leads to interesting artistic effects like guests, subjects leave while I'm drawing.
[Guest]: So somebody else comes and sits in their place.
[Guest]: And so I've drawn half of one person and the legs of the other person.
[Guest]: That kind of stuff happens on trains.
[Guest]: It happens a lot.
[Guest]: Like I just drew the head and then they left.
[Guest]: So okay, body from here, legs from here, hands from another place.
[Guest]: So part of your legs are stumps as we now know.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So it leads to interesting results.
[Guest]: So then what am I doing?
[Guest]: You know, am I capturing reality?
[Guest]: Because this is not a person that existed at all, right?
[Guest]: This person left and this is someone else's body and someone else.
[Guest]: So this thing never happened.
[Guest]: So there was another sense of independence that came to me when I thought and I accepted
[Guest]: this thing that I don't need to be realistic and I can't be realistic because of the nature
[Guest]: of my work and there's nothing wrong with that.
[Guest]: I am capturing a sense of a place over the course of time that I spend there.
[Guest]: So for example, I drew at a beach in Vancouver and I'm drawing 20, 30 people at the beach.
[Guest]: And by the time I draw someone on the left, they have walked on and I move on to drawing
[Guest]: someone on the right side of the page.
[Guest]: The left side of the scene has changed completely.
[Guest]: Those guys have left and gone home.
[Guest]: Maybe other people are sitting in different poses.
[Guest]: So I have never captured a single moment.
[Guest]: What I have captured is a sense of that place over the time I have spent there.
[Guest]: That moment never existed in singularity.
[Guest]: It is an amalgamation of things.
[Guest]: And that is a very liberating thought.
[Guest]: It lets you do more things once you realize you don't have this burden of needing to be
[Guest]: realistic.
[Guest]: And realism is a thing that really, it bores me.
[Guest]: I had ideas about it.
[Guest]: And then I read this about this essay by Arthur Danto called The End of Art.
[Guest]: And it's fascinating.
[Guest]: Like, it's the whole idea is exactly what I had thought about before.
[Guest]: And I love it when this happens, you know, like, I have conversations with podcasters
[Guest]: also.
[Guest]: And I like the moments not when they tell me something that I've never thought about.
[Guest]: As much as I like the moments when they tell me something I have thought about, and then
[Guest]: just been like, this is just me thinking what this this doesn't matter.
[Guest]: But then they validate it.
[Guest]: And then I give it value again, they again, give me a little bit of permission to back
[Guest]: my own ideas.
[Guest]: And I love those moments.
[Guest]: So The End of Art talks about this moment when Arthur Danto, who is an art historian,
[Guest]: art critic and philosopher, he in the 60s sees Andy Warhol's Brillo boxes.
[Guest]: So Brillo boxes are these packaging boxes.
[Guest]: And Andy Warhol's exhibit is literally a reproduction of that box in that same size with some other
[Guest]: materials.
[Guest]: What breaks Danto's mind is that how do you separate this from the real object?
[Guest]: What makes this art but not those real boxes art?
[Guest]: So he felt that now art has in a very particular sense, art has ended.
[Guest]: And he tracks two narratives of art.
[Guest]: He doesn't firstly he doesn't think of this as a bad thing.
[Guest]: He thinks this is a great thing for art.
[Guest]: And artists shouldn't think of this as a negative thing that all art has ended.
[Guest]: So what am I doing?
[Guest]: No, that's not what it is.
[Guest]: What he calls as the first narrative of art was when art had the responsibility of representing
[Guest]: the world.
[Guest]: And I have thought about this, why am I not realistic?
[Guest]: Because photography exists, why do I need to be realistic?
[Guest]: Photography exists, and you can record record the world as it is.
[Guest]: So I don't need to be realistic.
[Guest]: I don't need to compete with photography.
[Guest]: Why when they can do it, you can put a filter, it'll look artistic, do that.
[Guest]: His thing was that for the first narrative of art was when it needed to be photorealistic,
[Guest]: well, realistic, because photos didn't exist.
[Guest]: And that narrative ended when photography became a thing.
[Guest]: Now art needed to find a new purpose.
[Guest]: And that's when all of these ideas of impressionism, cubanism, cubism, surrealism, dadaism, all
[Guest]: of these were developed, because now what is art?
[Guest]: Why am I drawing?
[Guest]: Why am I painting?
[Guest]: Can I play with perspective?
[Guest]: Can I play with reality?
[Guest]: What is the purpose of doing this exercise?
[Guest]: And all these great artists delved into that.
[Guest]: And in his opinion, that narrative ended with Andy Warhol.
[Guest]: Because now there was no distinction between now what art is, is not about looking at it,
[Guest]: but it's about thinking about it.
[Guest]: So now in his words, we had reached the age of art theory.
[Guest]: Art was art in a certain context.
[Guest]: So he was thinking aloud and saying, if Leonardo da Vinci saw this, Brillo boxes, would he
[Guest]: consider it art?
[Guest]: If Michelangelo saw it, would he consider this art?
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: This is art only when you take into context the art of before, and the movement of art,
[Guest]: and then you come to this meta understanding that why can't this also be art?
[Guest]: Sort of Andy Warhol is doing that thing that, look at these Campbell soup cans, why can't
[Guest]: this be art, if you look at it?
[Guest]: And this only makes sense if you think about what else has been art before.
[Guest]: So we have entered the realm of art theory.
[Guest]: And this he called the end of art, the end of the second narrative.
[Guest]: And what happens now is so he distinguishes narratives from chronicles.
[Guest]: Narratives have a purpose.
[Guest]: They have a so like a story of anyone, it has a beginning, middle and end, it has a
[Guest]: epic conclusion.
[Guest]: But chronicles simply go on.
[Guest]: My life is a chronicle, like even after a narrative of my life has gotten over the rest
[Guest]: of my life continues.
[Guest]: That's the chronicle.
[Guest]: So now art has entered this phase, where it is free to be whatever it wants.
[Guest]: It does not have a narrative bound to it.
[Guest]: It does not have a duty to perform anymore.
[Guest]: It can be realistic if it likes, it can be impressionistic if it likes, it can dabble
[Guest]: in whatever direction, doing all kinds, it is completely free.
[Guest]: It is in the chronicle stage.
[Guest]: He's been criticized, he's got a lot of critics, because firstly, he talks only about Western
[Guest]: art, and then he kind of rejects Eastern art and other ideas in the process.
[Guest]: But this is a useful model.
[Guest]: Another thing I learned from control engineering, there's this quote that I'd shared with you.
[Guest]: The quote is that all models are wrong, but some models are useful.
[Guest]: So these models are not completely self sufficient, comprehensive models of the world, but they
[Guest]: can be useful within a context to understand something to work in to do something with.
[Guest]: And this has helped me do something.
[Guest]: So I have understood the purpose of realism, what it was, I have understood why I don't
[Guest]: need to be doing it, and why I don't need to feel guilty about not doing it.
[Guest]: So I can't draw eyes realistically, doesn't matter, you don't need to do it.
[Guest]: The point is, I'm trying to communicate.
[Guest]: And if I can communicate with two dots, I've saved a bit of time, I've saved a lot of effort,
[Guest]: I don't have a lot of time from my viewers, they are scrolling on Instagram, I have to
[Guest]: catch their attention.
[Guest]: So I am allowed to do these things.
[Guest]: And sort of this kind of studying of these rules backwards, these art theories and histories
[Guest]: is useful, like it helps you own what you do, it helps you inform what you do.
[Guest]: And I think it makes me a better artist, to communicate this, to write about it, to share
[Guest]: it in my newsletter to talk about why I'm doing what I'm doing and to share like, I
[Guest]: described my newsletter as sharing the journey of my self education.
[Guest]: And because who am I to teach right, like I'm no one to talk about art, but I am allowed
[Guest]: to share my journey.
[Amit Varma]: Sharing the journey of my self education is also actually how I describe the seen and
[Amit Varma]: the unseen and because everybody's trying to educate themselves, I guess that's why
[Amit Varma]: journeys like the Stryker chord, you know, one of the things that has led to my unease
[Amit Varma]: with a fair amount of art is that you it seems like you can only appreciate it in a particular
[Amit Varma]: context.
[Amit Varma]: And that is often a context of some kind of theory or politics that goes along with it.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you know, Marcel Duchamp's fountain, right, which is basically for those who don't
[Amit Varma]: know in 1917, Marcel Duchamp did a sculpture called Fountain, which is basically a urinal
[Amit Varma]: and it's signed Armat.
[Amit Varma]: And the point is that that work of art is only meaningful for someone who's steeped
[Amit Varma]: in the theory and in the context and in that particular narrative.
[Amit Varma]: It doesn't mean anything in and of itself, like if I come across that somewhere, I would
[Amit Varma]: just think, okay, today I've hydrated enough, let's give a little back to the world.
[Amit Varma]: But it would not strike me as anything other than that.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas I think there is, you know, and I'm just thinking aloud again, that there is some
[Amit Varma]: art and I don't want to make a value judgment comparing these two, but there is some art
[Amit Varma]: which will stand on its own.
[Amit Varma]: As we spoke earlier, as you know, going by Kandinsky's quote, you can just look at and
[Amit Varma]: immerse yourself in.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, a lot of poetry certainly does that for me.
[Amit Varma]: I don't need to know literary theory to fall in love with a short story or be greatly moved
[Amit Varma]: by a poem, even when I don't know what it means.
[Amit Varma]: So what are sort of your, I mean, you've already spoken about definitions of art and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the thoughts provoked by this essay you mentioned, but in general, what are your sort of thoughts
[Amit Varma]: on that?
[Amit Varma]: Like, what do you consider the best art that you've encountered?
[Amit Varma]: And did it take prior education to appreciate it for what it is, or does it just stand alone
[Guest]: on its own and it doesn't need that context?
[Guest]: About the fountain, for example, what do you find able to appreciate without prior knowledge
[Guest]: is also a function of the time you are in and who you are.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Like, so if I made these drawings and I showed them to Van Gogh, he might think that's not
[Guest]: art.
[Guest]: You're supposed to finish it.
[Guest]: This is unfinished.
[Guest]: I'll show it to Da Vinci and he'll think this is not art, like you have to, there's so much
[Guest]: more to do, like you haven't completed it yet.
[Guest]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: It's it's a sketch.
[Amit Varma]: And he'll show you in his notebooks how you can build a better race car than what you
[Guest]: did.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Air powered or water powered.
[Guest]: Why not?
[Guest]: So again, this is my art is also a function of its time and I'll being myself a function
[Guest]: of my time.
[Guest]: I will look at it and think, of course, this is independent, just like someone in 1917
[Guest]: might have thought, well, if you showed them the fountain, they'll be like, yeah, what
[Guest]: a great statement because I am being forced to look at this other stuff and call it art.
[Amit Varma]: This is art.
[Amit Varma]: I completely get it.
[Amit Varma]: Except that I think even in 1917, 99.9% of people would have seen a urinal and not seen
[Guest]: art.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's a fair point.
[Guest]: So I think about a lot of institutional ideas in this way, like, for example, I had this
[Guest]: idea about this thought about philosophy, for example, that you have someone like Nietzsche
[Guest]: writing about what would become existentialism and you have Sartre writing about it.
[Guest]: What are they doing?
[Guest]: Are they leading a movement?
[Guest]: Are they articulating a movement or a philosophy?
[Guest]: Should we call them the inventors of existentialism, for example, or somebody else as the inventor
[Guest]: of something else or are they observers?
[Guest]: So how many people read Sartre then and how many people explicitly read him and absorbed
[Guest]: that philosophy and then became like this?
[Guest]: And how much was it an observation of the time that he was in and the way that the art
[Guest]: and the culture and the behavior post-World War Two or during the last years of World
[Guest]: War Two was expressing itself.
[Guest]: So we give things these names, right?
[Guest]: And we give these movements, these leaders, but like, are they leaders or are they simply
[Guest]: like leaders in the sense of creators or are they leaders in the sense of observers who
[Guest]: articulated something?
[Guest]: So that's a very crucial point to me.
[Guest]: How many people read Schopenhauer?
[Guest]: How many people read Heidegger?
[Guest]: Like very few people must have read Heidegger.
[Guest]: He's a very important philosopher.
[Guest]: So is he just a really important philosopher to other philosophers or did he have something
[Guest]: useful to say for all of us?
[Guest]: If he did, certainly it wasn't communicated by him to all of those people.
[Guest]: So I like the idea of philosopher as Isaiah Berlin kind of pointed it out by saying that
[Guest]: I'm a historian of ideas.
[Guest]: And this is the reason why I personally started to read about existentialism and Nietzsche
[Guest]: and all of these other people also that I want to see the chronology of ideas over time,
[Guest]: the best ideas that people came up with, like, we are going through an era right now where
[Guest]: there's a resurgence of stoicism.
[Guest]: And stoicism is 2200 years old, like you tell someone that, and that's one of those mind
[Guest]: exploding moments that somebody, a Roman general 2200 years ago said this thing that matters
[Guest]: to me today, the continuity of human experience.
[Guest]: And what has kept that stoicism alive over 2200 years?
[Guest]: Is it Seneca?
[Guest]: Is it that Marcus Aurelius who wrote it?
[Guest]: No, it's not that.
[Guest]: How many people would have read him?
[Guest]: All of these things are a part of like, at least I think so, like they're a part of humankind.
[Guest]: And philosophers and artists, and these are just people who see it, and they share it.
[Guest]: But these notions of rebellion, whether cubism or surrealism is rebellious, they come from
[Guest]: tapping into the psyche of the community and the culture that they're in.
[Guest]: So these things are incepted in this culture by the vast masses of humanity.
[Guest]: And then one person comes along and he represents it on a canvas in one way.
[Guest]: But I don't think they invent it.
[Guest]: So again, when I think about whether people would understand it then as art or whether
[Guest]: they would just see this person is just making a urinal.
[Guest]: It's a bit of both.
[Guest]: Like surely some people will see it as that.
[Guest]: But it sort of implies just that art has a bit of a learning curve sometimes, you do
[Guest]: need to know a bit of context, you do need to be a bit erudite about it.
[Guest]: I don't think that's a bad thing.
[Guest]: And so this kind of is counterintuitive to how I practice.
[Guest]: And you would think that if you're tearing down institutions, why won't you tear down
[Guest]: institutions?
[Guest]: But there's a bit of both in me.
[Guest]: Like I feel like curators and institutions do an important job.
[Guest]: They do articulate these things.
[Guest]: Sometimes after the time, we needed these people for Van Gogh, for example, like, otherwise,
[Guest]: maybe we wouldn't have known about him today.
[Guest]: Like possibly, I don't know.
[Guest]: Maybe we wouldn't have known.
[Guest]: But there's a bit of both.
[Guest]: Like I feel like when people talk about this kind of art, and they say that, oh, but you
[Guest]: know, I don't understand it.
[Guest]: And there is this other stuff that I understand.
[Guest]: And therefore, this is better than that other stuff.
[Guest]: I don't know, like, I feel like that learning curve and that delayed reward at the end
[Guest]: of it also has its own value.
[Guest]: But it's not maybe a good entry point.
[Guest]: And it's never good if that is the art and other things are not art.
[Guest]: So we are in this beautiful place now where so many things can be art.
[Guest]: And there is no, you can't be a gatekeeper, because there isn't one gate to one thing,
[Guest]: you can be a gatekeeper to a certain kind of knowledge.
[Guest]: And that knowledge can still have value.
[Guest]: But there is other knowledge also.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I'm kind of conflicted about this, but just thinking aloud on, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if curators or the art elites hadn't discovered Van Gogh, would we have discovered him?
[Amit Varma]: The question is that it's much more possible that because of him, there are many Van Goghs
[Amit Varma]: who didn't get discovered.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I just feel that this notion of depending upon elite curators and educators and theorists
[Amit Varma]: is very dicey.
[Amit Varma]: Because if we lived in that world, honestly, I don't think you would have come up and I
[Amit Varma]: don't think I would have come up like if you had people curating podcasts and deciding
[Amit Varma]: what is kosher and what is not and what is worth listening to and what is not worth listening
[Amit Varma]: to and there's no other access to the masses.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I would have been lost and basically, you would have had to be lucky.
[Guest]: But then this situation is a function of today.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: You did need curators in the 80s, for example, to run All India Radio a certain way.
[Guest]: You can argue that sure, a lot of talent was stifled.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Simply there was no accommodation for all the talent either.
[Guest]: They couldn't have all become radio commentators.
[Amit Varma]: That's true.
[Amit Varma]: That's driven by scarcity that there is so much space to give and somebody has to determine
[Guest]: what goes there.
[Guest]: It is possible for us to be podcasters, that we can say that now, these curators are not
[Amit Varma]: necessary.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: But when knowledge is on the internet, and knowledge can proliferate and knowledge can
[Guest]: be preserved in decentralized ways, it's great.
[Guest]: But universities did a very essential function before because otherwise there is no chronological
[Guest]: assessment of how do you build upon knowledge if you don't have these few curators who safeguard
[Guest]: it, keep a lot of people out, and that's a necessary sin almost in the interest of preserving
[Guest]: and in the interest of cataloging and moving things forward.
[Guest]: We have therefore come to this place where we can be like, oh, we don't need you anymore.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, earlier in the show, you mentioned your great revelation, there are other people,
[Amit Varma]: which is a profound revelation to me also.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll share another revelation, which I think is as startling and which you might
[Amit Varma]: have come upon, but will certainly come upon later, even if you haven't now, which struck
[Amit Varma]: me when you spoke of, you know, they start to believe Stoicism has been around for 2200
[Amit Varma]: years, as if that is a long time.
[Amit Varma]: And the realization is that time is very short, or time is short, because we shouldn't use
[Amit Varma]: the word very.
[Amit Varma]: The older I get, the more I realize how quickly time passes.
[Amit Varma]: Someone commented on Twitter the other day, and I found it very perceptive comment that
[Amit Varma]: when I speak of, you know, when I speak of 30 years ago, and this is a person who commented
[Amit Varma]: when I speak of 30 years ago, I'm thinking of 1970.
[Amit Varma]: And then I suddenly realized, wait a second, it's 1991.
[Amit Varma]: You know, time passes much faster than we realize it.
[Amit Varma]: Before we kind of move on with this linear narrative from which we keep deviating, I'm
[Amit Varma]: actually going to do a flashback and go back to a phrase that you use earlier, and ask
[Amit Varma]: you to sort of elaborate on that, which is control engineering, where you spoke about
[Amit Varma]: how control engineering felt so natural to you, you immediately got it.
[Amit Varma]: And how even after you cease to be, you know, an engineer per se, it's dominated the way
[Amit Varma]: you look at everything and why it's so important for you.
[Amit Varma]: I wanted to go into this a little bit more, because it's very fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And I also wonder if it has something to do with a bent of mind that involves getting
[Amit Varma]: meta a little bit about things getting to the first principles about, you know, like
[Amit Varma]: I remember, last year, I was telling somebody something about podcasting, who doesn't podcast
[Amit Varma]: or I mean, person who just has a Facebook presence and rants about many things there.
[Amit Varma]: And I was telling him about podcasting.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, in my excitement of all that I had learned, I was harrowing Gyan and at
[Amit Varma]: one point, he said, that is so academic who listens to the pseudo bullshit.
[Amit Varma]: And I was like, wait a minute, I'm actually a successful practitioner at this shit, right.
[Amit Varma]: And part of the reason I think the show gets better is because I try very deeply to get
[Amit Varma]: meta and think about all of these things, the importance of listening, how you structure
[Amit Varma]: a conversation, you know, how you get the kind of flow that you get.
[Amit Varma]: And I sense that you look at things the same way in the sense you're trying to break things
[Amit Varma]: down.
[Amit Varma]: Why do I see what I see?
[Amit Varma]: Why is my art the way my art is just that very profound point you made about your weaknesses
[Amit Varma]: eventually turning into your style about constraints giving you freedom.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about control engineering.
[Amit Varma]: And if this point is separate from that, tell me a little bit about this mindset that you
[Amit Varma]: have, and whether it's natural to you, or you worked at developing it, this mindset
[Amit Varma]: about just getting to first principles, taking that step back and getting a little meta.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think they're both the same thing.
[Guest]: So the reason why I'm fascinated by control engineering is because it offers a way to
[Guest]: do this.
[Guest]: And there are reflections of it everywhere in my life.
[Guest]: And so control engineering breaks the whole world into systems.
[Guest]: So once you're a control engineer, you see everything as systems, and systems which have
[Guest]: inputs and outputs, and they function a certain way.
[Guest]: And by intelligently understanding or manipulating these inputs, and studying the outputs, you
[Guest]: can understand what's why did that input turn into this output.
[Guest]: So therefore, this system must be doing this, this, this, this, this, oh, this system multiplies
[Guest]: all numbers by five, or this system does two x plus five, or this system adds so and so
[Guest]: feedback, and it does this and that, and it turns this into energy.
[Guest]: And with a 30% effect, you figure out these black boxes.
[Guest]: And the way to do that the way to identify systems that are black boxes is a very fascinating
[Guest]: thing.
[Guest]: What are the structures that we have that we can put here and see if this holds true?
[Guest]: Oh, this doesn't work?
[Guest]: How do we why don't we try this kind of structure and see if this fits?
[Guest]: Where did these structures come from?
[Guest]: How did we learn about them, this idea of isolating variables and controlling certain
[Guest]: variables and then seeing how something works?
[Guest]: It's a very nice way to look at the world.
[Guest]: And I have an inclination to look at my world in this way.
[Guest]: And therefore, I appreciated what I learned from doing this.
[Guest]: So I'll give you an example of why this was already something that I was thinking about
[Guest]: from one of my favorite authors of all time is Kurt Vonnegut.
[Guest]: And one of my favorite books by Kurt Vonnegut is Cat's Cradle.
[Guest]: And in Cat's Cradle, there is a fictional religion called Bokononism talked about by
[Guest]: the prophet Bokonon and who lives on this island.
[Guest]: And at the start of the book, Bokonon says that.
[Guest]: This religion is for any person who does not understand how a religion can be founded on
[Guest]: useful lies will not like this book either.
[Guest]: Useful lies.
[Guest]: So there is another quote in the start of this book in which he says something like
[Guest]: we all live by the FOMA that make us happy and healthy and kind and wise.
[Guest]: And FOMA is a fictional word amongst many in the book, which means harmless untruths.
[Guest]: So we all live by these white lies that make us happy and healthy and wise and kind.
[Guest]: And this is the basis of all religion.
[Guest]: It's a bunch of suspended delusions that we agree upon, whether with others or whether
[Guest]: just inside our own minds.
[Guest]: But they help us make sense of our world.
[Guest]: The quote that I said before that was shared with to me by a control engineering professor
[Guest]: in a lecture was all models are wrong, but some models are useful.
[Guest]: All models are wrong means all models are simplifications of the truth.
[Guest]: They are not the truth.
[Guest]: So something as simple as Hooke's law of elasticity, that extension X is equal to a constant.
[Guest]: So if you apply a force F, it is equal to a constant multiplied by X, which is the amount
[Guest]: of deviation in that elastic deviation.
[Guest]: So this is not true because it is a it's a linearized simplification of a nonlinear reality.
[Guest]: There is many, many more forces that are little, little deviations.
[Guest]: Many things come together, but we can make a useful equation.
[Guest]: By within certain bounds, thinking of it as linear F is equal to KX and it is super useful.
[Guest]: It is the basis for a lot of design, limitless number of applications.
[Guest]: Similarly, all of these basic laws like F is equal to MA and E is equal to MC squared,
[Guest]: all of these are simplifications of very, very deep and profound things.
[Guest]: In a sense, they are all wrong because they are not exactly true, but some of them are
[Guest]: useful and therefore we should not discard them.
[Guest]: We should think about things don't have value only if they are absolutely true.
[Guest]: Things can have useful purpose in our lives, even when we know they are not true, simply
[Guest]: by our understanding how to use them within a certain context, therefore religion, therefore
[Guest]: the role of fiction in life.
[Guest]: And you see, you see the conflict of that so much, right?
[Guest]: Like if you tell someone that a certain epic or a certain religious book is fiction and
[Guest]: they take so much offense because fiction means it's not true and only true things have
[Guest]: value.
[Guest]: And that's such a narrow-minded point of view that stories don't have value.
[Guest]: The most valuable things in the world are stories.
[Guest]: We all live, Elon Musk has a story of himself.
[Guest]: He doesn't have the truth of himself out in the world.
[Guest]: This is the source of his power.
[Guest]: All religions and all prophets have stories of themselves.
[Guest]: Nobody really wants the truth.
[Guest]: They want a nice story.
[Guest]: All political leaders have nice narratives and stories around them.
[Guest]: And we believe them even if we sort of think it's not true.
[Guest]: We know it's not true, but we know that our story is stronger than that guy's story.
[Guest]: Our story will win.
[Guest]: So let's stick with our story.
[Guest]: So this understanding is very profound.
[Guest]: It applies in so many ways to all of life and control engineering sort of was the scientific
[Guest]: way for me to appreciate it.
[Guest]: I heard it and I thought, look, this applies to art.
[Guest]: This applies to history.
[Guest]: This applies to someone like Gandhi, for example, right?
[Guest]: A person with many flaws, so many detailed nuances that I don't know about.
[Guest]: And there are so many people who don't know about it, right?
[Guest]: But if believing in the myth of Gandhi as a peaceful leader makes someone peaceful,
[Guest]: makes them believe in nonviolence and not hurting other people, makes them believe positively
[Guest]: about the value of bringing people along and making a movement, isn't that lie way more
[Guest]: useful than the truth of maybe he's sexist.
[Guest]: Maybe he's casteist.
[Guest]: Who cares?
[Guest]: Like what a useless truth.
[Guest]: Like you could, someone could make an argument that let's discard that truth.
[Guest]: Let's forget.
[Guest]: Let's erase it from public memory because that lie is just so much more useful in making
[Guest]: us human.
[Guest]: And it may be through this deification is of more use to society.
[Guest]: And it's something I think about a lot, like you are wedded to the truth as engineers.
[Guest]: You think that you're going for objective truth, but like, what does, what does the
[Guest]: truth matter?
[Guest]: Like engineering and science is just such a small part of the world.
[Guest]: Math is such a small, like tangible things are such a small part of the world.
[Guest]: And we engineers, we think, and this is the age of the tech bros, like we think that we
[Guest]: understand everything because everything can be broken into equations and creativity will
[Guest]: be broken into equations so that AI will become creative.
[Guest]: But we don't appreciate how many things are intangible.
[Guest]: Most of the world, most of reality is intangible.
[Guest]: Most of reality is only inside our heads.
[Guest]: It doesn't actually matter what someone did to us.
[Guest]: What matters is how we feel about them.
[Guest]: And that's how we behave with them.
[Guest]: So control engineering helped me to make sense of all of these things, incomplete information,
[Guest]: but can be still useful if you make it useful.
[Guest]: And I've talked about all the ways that it has helped me in non-engineering ways, but
[Guest]: it has also made, it made me a better engineer.
[Guest]: It helped me find out so much about these complex things that are designed.
[Guest]: So for example, I worked on this system, which was like a creator's tray.
[Guest]: Like suppose you have glasses on it and it's automated though.
[Guest]: It's not actually being held by somebody.
[Guest]: What if you pushed it?
[Guest]: How can you design a system that will not let the glasses fall?
[Guest]: It will absorb the shock and it will react appropriately like the way this lazy boy chair
[Guest]: does like dampening and spinning action.
[Guest]: So just those things, playing with things and figuring out how they work.
[Guest]: It's such a powerful, empowering thing to do.
[Guest]: And I just love that thing.
[Guest]: And education by my goal with going to Delft to study was I wanted to be a real engineer
[Guest]: and they made me a real engineer.
[Guest]: Like they gave, they empowered me.
[Guest]: And like that is just, it feels super great to have had that education.
[Guest]: And even if I don't quote unquote use it, all knowledge is always there.
[Amit Varma]: Everything adds up.
[Amit Varma]: So just to elaborate on the lazy boy reference, all guests who come to my home studio now
[Amit Varma]: now get a choice.
[Amit Varma]: They can either use a lazy boy or they can use a green soul gaming chair, which I have
[Amit Varma]: an extra pair of.
[Amit Varma]: And I mean, I use a green soul gaming chair, but the second chair is a recent addition.
[Amit Varma]: And so Nishant is the first guest to be offered that option.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, you know, being from Calcutta, a half Bengali like me can relate.
[Amit Varma]: He chose a lazy boy.
[Amit Varma]: So and the Calcutta boys are lazy boys for Calcutta boys are something in the air.
[Amit Varma]: It's good to be lazy.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of things, a couple of observations.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I love that quote.
[Amit Varma]: Firstly, I think I've actually quoted it earlier on my show.
[Amit Varma]: And I first heard it from you, which is all models are wrong, but some models are useful.
[Amit Varma]: Fantastic quote.
[Amit Varma]: And the world is complex.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the cliche on my show that we all contain multitudes of Whitman quote is a subset
[Amit Varma]: of that, of the world being complex.
[Amit Varma]: And I completely get that, that we can never really get at the truth.
[Amit Varma]: Nevertheless, I actually think in a historical context, and I've been discussing this on
[Amit Varma]: my show a lot, that the truth nevertheless has value.
[Amit Varma]: Like I know you were just thinking aloud when you spoke of Gandhi and, you know, can we
[Amit Varma]: not speak of the sexism and casteism and can we just speak of the nonviolence and the satyagraha.
[Amit Varma]: But I think part of the mistake that we made post independence was taking exactly that
[Amit Varma]: view.
[Amit Varma]: That let's kind of whitewash the things that have gone wrong in our history.
[Amit Varma]: Kapil Komiriddi spoke about this very eloquently in his episode with me, Manu Pillay agreed
[Amit Varma]: with him when he came on the show recently.
[Amit Varma]: And the truth is what happened post independence was that our historians to avoid conflict
[Amit Varma]: in present day society decided to paper over earlier periods of time when there was violence
[Amit Varma]: by the Mughals and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And Komiriddi's contention is that now there is a backlash in the other direction.
[Amit Varma]: And you should just have let it play out and let society resolve its own problems, we are
[Guest]: mature enough to do so.
[Guest]: Once we have reduced things to binary good and evil, then it's this is the narrative
[Amit Varma]: now.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And we're losing for that.
[Amit Varma]: And I really think that it's important to acknowledge the truth that has a value of
[Amit Varma]: its own while accepting it can never fully be reached, but acknowledge the broad truth.
[Amit Varma]: But also, I just think that history should not matter.
[Amit Varma]: Like Gandhi was this or that, you know, all of these guys, you know, you're Gandhis and
[Amit Varma]: Vajpayees and Nehru's and Savarkar's contain multitudes, I think discussing the people
[Amit Varma]: are is irrelevant, we can discuss ideas, you know, Gandhi got it completely wrong on railways
[Amit Varma]: and doctors, both of which he was against, Gandhi got it completely right on the means
[Amit Varma]: being more important than the ends and the importance of peaceful non resistance, there
[Amit Varma]: is so much to learn from that.
[Amit Varma]: And I agree with you that we should kind of look at the learnings and discard his bad
[Amit Varma]: ideas while seeing them for bad ideas and acknowledging them that he had them.
[Guest]: I think I think yeah, so what it comes to is that that quote, like all models are wrong,
[Guest]: but some are useful.
[Guest]: The meaning of useful here with the asterisk is that some models are useful within a certain
[Guest]: context within, therefore, an engineering control terms you would call within boundaries.
[Guest]: So these this equation holds the Hooke's law of elasticity holds until this limit beyond
[Guest]: which it does not hold anymore because elasticity is lost.
[Guest]: So all of these equations, all of these systems work within variables being within these boundaries,
[Guest]: this variable in this boundary, this and that.
[Guest]: Similarly, so like, for example, like similarly, it applies in social situations, right?
[Guest]: Like, I have been a militant atheist before, like, anybody who is religious, I make it
[Guest]: my business, I would make it my business to tell them why it's a foolish thing, right?
[Guest]: But what a pointless thing to do, like a waste, like, so my grandmother is religious.
[Guest]: It makes her a nicer person, and in that little context of her life, religion is a good thing.
[Guest]: And I needed to appreciate that the truth has its place, or the absolute truth has its
[Guest]: place, and the useful lie within a boundary within a certain set of limits has its useful
[Amit Varma]: place.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I couldn't agree more.
[Amit Varma]: That's why I think as one goes along with life and realizes that, listen, fundamentally,
[Amit Varma]: life is meaningless and sad and ends in death, and we need to choose our delusions to get
[Amit Varma]: by and some people have chosen religion and it's a convenient way to kind of get by and
[Amit Varma]: we need to be kind and appreciate that I think there is also this balance between fidelity
[Amit Varma]: to the truth and kindness.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes I think in some situations, you just need to not argue and just be kind
[Amit Varma]: to the person.
[Amit Varma]: Though I think that this invocation to kindness is often used by some people in ideological
[Amit Varma]: context as appealing for, you know, when they don't want to talk about the truth, that don't
[Amit Varma]: argue with what I believe, I will be offended and you have to be kind.
[Amit Varma]: So I think that is another extreme we kind of should not go to.
[Amit Varma]: Just continuing down this sort of control engineering mindset where you realize that
[Amit Varma]: perfection is impossible, because, you know, all models are false, you can only get useful
[Amit Varma]: with it.
[Amit Varma]: Does that also then lead to that notion of satisficing like, you know, one thing that
[Amit Varma]: I speak about in my course is that whenever you do something, there is that tradeoff between
[Amit Varma]: getting it done and getting it right.
[Amit Varma]: And my point always is that, as an artist, don't think about getting it right, just think
[Amit Varma]: about getting it done.
[Amit Varma]: And you can get it right later.
[Amit Varma]: But especially when it comes to a first draft, just get it done.
[Amit Varma]: The important thing is to get it done.
[Amit Varma]: And you could also talk about this as a dichotomy between perfection and production.
[Amit Varma]: And the irony here is that the route to getting it right is to get it done again and again.
[Amit Varma]: And the route to perfection is through repeated production as you get better and better and
[Amit Varma]: better.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, is it a good quality for an artist to satisfies like satisfies is a word
[Amit Varma]: that is combination term combination of the two words satisfy and satisfies.
[Amit Varma]: And what it means is you're satisfied with something that suffices, that you're not aiming
[Amit Varma]: for perfection, that something that is good enough, you're happy to put it out there and
[Amit Varma]: just move on.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems like by the nature of your work, the sneaky art, you've been forced by circumstances
[Amit Varma]: into satisficing all the time, where you don't have time, the person will get up and go,
[Amit Varma]: you just got to get what you can and then move on.
[Amit Varma]: So do you feel that there is sort of deeper artistic value in this, for example, do you
[Amit Varma]: think about this?
[Amit Varma]: Do you feel that this is a constraint or do you feel that by happenstance, you've been
[Amit Varma]: forced into thinking this way, and it's actually a good way to think, you know, like you described
[Amit Varma]: earlier that, let's say that there is someone who wants to do hyper realistic stuff, and
[Amit Varma]: that person is standing in a queue, and that person cannot take out their material, but
[Amit Varma]: you can you're always drawing, right?
[Amit Varma]: And to me, that seems like a massive, massive, massive privilege, that at any point in time,
[Amit Varma]: and I will tell my readers that he made a sketch of me while we were talking.
[Amit Varma]: So just just imagine.
[Amit Varma]: So what are your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: So I have I put myself in this situation where my perfectionism could not get in my way.
[Guest]: Choosing to draw with a pen, choosing to draw quickly, choosing to draw things that are
[Guest]: transient, all of these things, perfectionism could not enter the picture.
[Guest]: It's not a player in this game anymore.
[Guest]: And I put it in in front of myself consciously, because I understand what my tendencies are.
[Guest]: I know what my evils are.
[Guest]: This is the mistake I always make, and I need to not make it.
[Guest]: So I needed to be in a situation where perfectionism was not an option for me.
[Guest]: So I often think about this idea of the things we call constraints.
[Guest]: So it's a constraint that I have only one pen.
[Guest]: I can't use another color.
[Guest]: I can't use another line with thickness.
[Guest]: I can't do this.
[Guest]: I can't do that.
[Guest]: I can't represent so many things.
[Guest]: It's a constraint that I'm drawing quickly.
[Guest]: That is this idea that you should be free to do your best work.
[Guest]: You should have options so you can make the best choice.
[Guest]: But more and more, I find that the best work does not come from these things like the best
[Guest]: work comes when there is a deadline, for example, because you have to finish you finish, otherwise
[Guest]: the best work just stays in your head, it never comes down on paper.
[Guest]: Similarly, constraints in various forms.
[Guest]: If you just change your perspective a little bit, they bring you great freedom.
[Guest]: Having the constraint of only one fountain pen, not a pencil meant the freedom to finish
[Guest]: many sketches.
[Guest]: Having the constraint of time meant the freedom to draw this thing that is only there for
[Guest]: this little time.
[Guest]: Having the constraint of being sneaky meant that I am not anymore drawing in conspicuous
[Guest]: positions.
[Guest]: Think about what a conspicuous spot is.
[Guest]: If you're in front of the Eiffel Tower, that's a conspicuous spot.
[Guest]: It's a conspicuous spot because everybody else is there.
[Guest]: Because everybody wants to take a photo from that angle.
[Guest]: Therefore, it is the most photographed and the most often seen view of the Eiffel Tower.
[Guest]: By being sneaky, by imposing sneakiness on my art, I cannot take that option.
[Guest]: I will circle around it two or three times.
[Guest]: I will look for spots where nobody is.
[Guest]: Therefore, I will look for spots from where pictures have not been taken or not likely
[Guest]: to be taken as much.
[Guest]: I will therefore find something fresh.
[Guest]: It has given me the freedom to discard my first point of view, my second choice, my
[Guest]: third choice, and often my fourth choice, and therefore discover something that others
[Guest]: have not.
[Guest]: It has given me the freedom to find something original, quote-unquote, because nothing is
[Guest]: really original, but it has given me the freedom to find something that others don't and to
[Guest]: show something that other people are not showing.
[Guest]: So I often think about this thing, about constraints and what we call constraints and why we try
[Guest]: to run from constraints, because constraints have given me so many different freedoms.
[Guest]: I'm only going to draw in this spot, and once I leave, I am not going to touch this sketch
[Guest]: again.
[Guest]: Therefore, there is this essence of that moment here.
[Guest]: Some of these are incomplete, quote-unquote, they're not finished works, but they say where
[Guest]: they are.
[Guest]: They are an honest record of that time, and that is a quality that they have because they
[Guest]: are never touched upon again.
[Guest]: And that is a quality that very few other things can have.
[Guest]: And as we explore this field of being creative entrepreneurs, being artists who have to create
[Guest]: this brand, all of these identities matter because all of these identities are useful
[Guest]: things to add value around your work.
[Amit Varma]: So you mentioned the term creative entrepreneur, and that's kind of where I want to go next,
[Amit Varma]: because it strikes me that in this modern age, there is much that is exciting about
[Amit Varma]: this modern age.
[Amit Varma]: But one thing that I feel a little unease at is that a creator is also expected to be
[Amit Varma]: an entrepreneur, in the sense he's supposed to be the seller of his work, the entrepreneur
[Amit Varma]: of his brand, be the guy pushing himself, like your art in the way that you actually
[Amit Varma]: make it, that you produce it is sneaky.
[Amit Varma]: But the selling is the opposite of that, you've got to go out on a limb and figure out how
[Amit Varma]: to get publicity and how to get your art out there.
[Amit Varma]: Now it turns out that at one level, of course, this is something that you figured out how
[Amit Varma]: to do well, whether it came naturally to you, or you worked at it, but you figured out how
[Amit Varma]: to do well, but many people don't.
[Amit Varma]: And the you know, and it's kind of unfair that artists also have to be entrepreneurs
[Amit Varma]: in this way, in this day and age, though it is possible to, you know, that things can
[Amit Varma]: work out and you can become successful without thinking of it in an entrepreneurial way.
[Amit Varma]: But that takes a certain amount of luck.
[Amit Varma]: For most artists, you're constantly working, working, working to get your brand out there
[Amit Varma]: to get opportunities to figure out how to scale to figure out how to even gather the
[Amit Varma]: first 1002 fans as it were.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me of your journey in that regard, because you've already described how you want
[Amit Varma]: to be a writer, you give up that other pyramid of engineer, PhD, whatever, to be a writer.
[Amit Varma]: And then you discover drawing and is incredibly satisfying.
[Amit Varma]: But from there, to making it a commercial proposition to sort of actually make money
[Amit Varma]: from it and make it commercially viable, what was that journey like?
[Amit Varma]: How did your thinking evolve?
[Amit Varma]: You know, what are the different routes that you explored?
[Guest]: So I registered sneaky art as a business when I was living in Wisconsin.
[Guest]: So I have business taxes that I collect and I pay as a business and I have business costs
[Guest]: and more formalized setup that happened at that time.
[Guest]: And I did it then because in Wisconsin, in this town of 80,000 people called Eau Claire,
[Guest]: Wisconsin, right in the middle of the state, 90 miles away from the nearest city, there
[Guest]: is this artist's market in every Saturday of summer, next to the farmer's market.
[Guest]: So in the park where everybody congregates every morning from 6am to 12pm, a bunch of
[Guest]: artists set up stalls and sell their wares.
[Guest]: And having spent a year there, I decided now I want to sell my art.
[Guest]: So as non sneaky as it gets, I have set up a stall with my prints and I am sitting and
[Guest]: people are passing by who are here to buy vegetables or to buy cheese or something.
[Guest]: And they stop and they look at my prints and they ask me what these are.
[Guest]: And I tell them, it pushed me way out of my comfort zone, like firstly talking to complete
[Guest]: strangers and telling them what I do and why they should care for it.
[Guest]: Then putting a dollar value to my work, and then convincing, like the act of making a
[Guest]: sale, there is some element of convincing, there is a pitch, even if it is something
[Guest]: you give reluctantly, or you don't at all, but there is a pitch that needs to be made
[Guest]: in some way, whether your art does it for you, or you talk a bit at least helps to talk.
[Guest]: But I had to do these things which were uncomfortable.
[Guest]: But these things have immense value.
[Guest]: So from speaking to people who are there to buy vegetables, not here to buy art, and getting
[Guest]: them to buy art, I learned things.
[Guest]: Firstly from showing my work to people as a commercial artist, so I'm here to sell.
[Guest]: With that in mind, when I showed my work to people, I set up my stall in a very formal
[Guest]: way.
[Guest]: Like I made sure I thought about the experience of somebody passing by, and the experience
[Guest]: of somebody who decided to stop and walk in, what would they see next, where would they
[Guest]: look, what should they be able to pick up, I thought about these things.
[Guest]: So what that does is, it makes me think about my art not as the artist.
[Guest]: I have to externalize it, I have to look at it dispassionately.
[Guest]: Why should they look at this piece, why should they look at that piece, is this going to
[Guest]: be interesting to someone, why would they be interested in this, would it be simply
[Guest]: because I enjoyed drawing it, that can't be the criteria.
[Guest]: This is a useful exercise if you're an artist to get into.
[Guest]: This is a useful exercise if you're a creative to get into.
[Guest]: Even as a writer, you'd love your writing maybe, but you should think about the other
[Guest]: person who's going to read it and why should they give a damn, because there is so much
[Guest]: they can do.
[Guest]: You can buy excellent cheese in Wisconsin, you don't need to buy my art.
[Guest]: I had to price my art a certain way, I had to put that dollar value, and I thought about
[Guest]: what is it that I want to be doing here, what is my objective here, what do I want to learn
[Guest]: from it, what is a win, is a win a dollar amount, tough, tough to put a dollar amount
[Guest]: and because you don't know what's good, what's bad, I can settle $200 is a great amount if
[Guest]: I make that much sale.
[Guest]: But what is that, how do I know that's good.
[Guest]: So I have to have some notion of something that is good to me.
[Guest]: So I set this benchmark for my first year, first summer that I was selling art, that
[Guest]: I want to sell art for as cheap as possible.
[Guest]: What I want to do is, so controlling variables here, right?
[Guest]: So I want to make as many sales as I can.
[Guest]: And I want to control the various variables around the sale.
[Guest]: One variable is, I don't want to spend so much money.
[Guest]: What is their budget?
[Guest]: They are not here to spend money on art, right?
[Guest]: So I had to think of the minimum amount of money that someone would take out of their
[Guest]: pocket without a second thought.
[Guest]: What is that number in this place?
[Guest]: It is contextual.
[Guest]: This is a rural place in Wisconsin, it's not Chicago City, Chicago, that number might be
[Guest]: $20, India, that Bombay, that number might be 200 rupees, Calcutta, that number might
[Guest]: be 100 rupees, Wisconsin, that number as I perceived it was $5.
[Guest]: So my cheapest drawing needs to be $5, my most expensive drawing can't be more than
[Guest]: $20.
[Guest]: With this idea, I am controlling for hesitation, financial hesitation.
[Guest]: Now this is not a factor anymore in this game.
[Guest]: What is a factor?
[Guest]: Now the factor is only do I want it?
[Guest]: Now I get to examine, do people want my drawing?
[Guest]: I am not pricing anyone out.
[Guest]: Anybody can buy this.
[Guest]: $5, anybody can spend here and if they like my work, they might not buy the $20 piece
[Guest]: but they will want to go away with the $5 piece.
[Guest]: Once you have them, you have them.
[Guest]: And they want to do something now because once they are interested, they actually want
[Guest]: to spend money.
[Guest]: They don't want to leave empty handed.
[Guest]: It makes people feel bad.
[Guest]: It's part of the psychology of spending money that you want to do something now.
[Guest]: So $5.
[Guest]: What this did was, now I started to think, what is the space that my art can occupy in
[Guest]: someone's life?
[Guest]: What is a $5 piece of art?
[Guest]: It can't be a piece on a wall.
[Guest]: It has to be a small print, maybe.
[Guest]: How do people use small prints?
[Guest]: Is it something that looks like a card?
[Guest]: Maybe a sticker for their laptops?
[Guest]: Is it something that maybe they can put in their wallets?
[Guest]: So what art of mine does that purpose?
[Guest]: I'm now thinking about my art in terms of how it means to someone in their life.
[Guest]: $5 is what they pay for it.
[Guest]: $5 is not what it means anymore.
[Guest]: Now that it is there, why would they want it in their life?
[Guest]: This is a useful exercise for all creatives also.
[Guest]: Think about what place do you occupy?
[Guest]: After one season of selling art in this way, I sold hundreds of prints this way.
[Guest]: I got many commissions.
[Guest]: Lots of people were super happy to buy it.
[Guest]: I sold stickers.
[Guest]: So a bunch of students came one time who didn't want to spend even $5.
[Guest]: For $1, I gave them 2-3 stickers.
[Guest]: And they bought sets of stickers, not because they could only afford it.
[Guest]: So somebody ended up spending $10 on stickers.
[Guest]: Not because that's the only thing they can afford.
[Guest]: But this is the way they want that art.
[Guest]: So I learned that art has many final forms.
[Guest]: I made a drawing in a sketchbook.
[Guest]: Now it can be so many different things.
[Guest]: It can be a print.
[Guest]: It can be a print on a wall, like on fine art paper.
[Guest]: It could even be a fabric print.
[Guest]: It can be a sticker.
[Guest]: It can be a digital piece that somebody buys to make as a wallpaper or a phone wallpaper
[Guest]: or something.
[Guest]: All of these are various ways that people engage with art in their lives.
[Guest]: We often dismiss people who don't buy fine art as Philistines or whatever.
[Guest]: They don't appreciate things.
[Guest]: But more people appreciate art than that.
[Guest]: It is incumbent on the artist to think about the way that their audience engages with art.
[Guest]: It is not the right approach, in my opinion, to make the art and then be like somebody
[Guest]: owes you a sale.
[Guest]: Somebody owes it to buy from you because you are so creative, you have done your job.
[Guest]: That is irresponsible.
[Guest]: That is, it's, I don't think in any field of work that is appreciated.
[Guest]: But in terms of art, it's almost made into a virtue because people don't want to engage
[Guest]: with this commercial side, which is ugly and demeaning.
[Guest]: And for a long time, it's been that way because we haven't had the tools of commercial engagement
[Guest]: in our hands.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Like somebody like Da Vinci and all the other big artists, they needed patrons at a time
[Guest]: in Florence, in Italy, they needed the Medici family to patronize all these artists who
[Guest]: became fantastic, great artists.
[Guest]: So you need to please this person.
[Guest]: Then he will put your work somewhere that hopefully other people can see it.
[Guest]: And then maybe it lasts the test of time, blah, blah, blah, becomes a thing.
[Guest]: But so over the last 20 years, that thing changed for us because of the internet.
[Guest]: First there was no money.
[Guest]: You can put your art there.
[Guest]: There's no money.
[Guest]: You can put it on Flickr, whatever, whatever.
[Guest]: Then you can put it on Facebook.
[Guest]: And then you can make these business pages.
[Guest]: And then you can put it on Instagram.
[Guest]: And now suddenly you have affiliate marketing.
[Guest]: And suddenly you can reach an audience and build an infinite audience potentially.
[Guest]: And you can get money from a few people who decide to endorse you affiliates.
[Guest]: So brands and corporations who like, Oh, I'll give you a pen.
[Guest]: I'll give you you only use my sketchbook, for example, use only my art supplies, my
[Guest]: paints and tag us and we will then give you so much so much.
[Guest]: And that have that works for a lot of artists.
[Guest]: And now we have reached a point where even the means of monetization are distributed.
[Guest]: You can gather small funds and micro payments from various various hundreds of fans.
[Guest]: This is very freeing.
[Guest]: This is super liberating because like you mentioned with the blogs, for example, now
[Guest]: it's not 800 words or 1000 words or 5000 words, it can be 50 words, it can be microfiction,
[Guest]: it can be haiku.
[Guest]: If you have the fans, if you have the people who care, then you get to define the terms.
[Guest]: Every artist should love that reality.
[Guest]: You are not bound to make a fine art piece on canvas, which is eight feet tall or something
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: You can do whatever you want.
[Guest]: You can make a product out of the piece, you can make a product out of a cool photo of
[Guest]: the piece, which is better than the piece itself.
[Guest]: The experience of looking at art on Instagram is the experience you're offering the thing
[Guest]: that you are offering the experience of watching you draw through a time lapse video of which
[Guest]: I post many myself.
[Guest]: That experience is the product you are offering.
[Guest]: Suddenly the final piece that I drew and how it turned out is irrelevant.
[Guest]: Just watching me draw set to some cool music on reels or tick tock.
[Guest]: That is the product.
[Guest]: I'm giving you that beautiful 30 seconds.
[Guest]: You can replay it again and again and forever and enjoy it.
[Guest]: And many people do that.
[Guest]: They watch these videos again and again, again, huge freedom for the artist.
[Guest]: You can do whatever you want and you can reach people who are okay with that.
[Guest]: These freedoms come with the responsibility now that now you have to think about why they
[Guest]: should care.
[Guest]: Because if you can do whatever you want, anybody else can also do whatever they want, right?
[Guest]: Why should they look at your art and not the art of some person in say, the other side
[Guest]: of the world?
[Guest]: If you live in Vancouver, why shouldn't they look at someone's art in Australia, like it's
[Guest]: all Instagram.
[Guest]: There is a fantastic artist I follow from Australia who does beautiful time lapse videos,
[Guest]: huge audience way bigger than mine.
[Guest]: And of course, people will follow her like it's all the same, right?
[Guest]: I'm competing with her in a sense, you could, I could think that and then I could be like,
[Guest]: oh, that's so wrong.
[Guest]: But that's, that's not how this works.
[Guest]: The responsibility that comes to me is that, how do I differentiate myself?
[Guest]: I get to do that.
[Guest]: This is also a freedom I have and but it's part of my responsibilities.
[Guest]: I have to brand myself, I have to talk about myself in a certain way.
[Guest]: Why should someone care about me?
[Guest]: Is it because I'm the greatest artist in the world?
[Guest]: So am I making it my business to compete with 5 million artists on Instagram?
[Guest]: Van Gogh, Da Vinci, Michelangelo never had this kind of competition.
[Guest]: They had to compete for the attention of one patron or two patrons or 10 patrons only with
[Guest]: the people who are in that town, or somebody comes from outside.
[Guest]: That's it.
[Guest]: That's the competition.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: They didn't have, nobody has ever had to compete with so many people.
[Amit Varma]: It's like an artist in Versova competing with everyone else in Versova for the attention
[Amit Varma]: of the king of Versova.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, even smaller, Yari Road, because the population in the town would be so much
[Guest]: less.
[Guest]: Yeah, right.
[Guest]: But if he makes it his job to be on Instagram and thinks that now he's in competition with
[Guest]: everybody else who's on Instagram, then that's a losing battle again.
[Guest]: It does not mean that you're not good.
[Guest]: It does not mean that you don't deserve to make money off your art.
[Guest]: Surely the point is not that one person should make money off art, like only the person who's
[Guest]: right on top.
[Guest]: So you have to demolish this whole structure.
[Guest]: Why you is not about just how good you are, because that's a race you're not going to
[Guest]: win.
[Guest]: Why you is a question now of other things.
[Guest]: Maybe it has to do with how you made your art.
[Guest]: Maybe it has to do with who you are.
[Guest]: Why should somebody in Versova care about an artist in Versova and not an artist in
[Guest]: Australia?
[Guest]: You have to give them that reason.
[Guest]: They will like to talk, know an artist in Versova.
[Guest]: Actually it's true.
[Guest]: They would.
[Guest]: But it is your responsibility to develop those reasons.
[Guest]: It is your responsibility to woo them and to do the communication job that does this.
[Guest]: So with these tools of monetization, these tools of distribution, these tools of audience
[Guest]: outreach, comes the responsibility that now you get, you have to, you can do outreach.
[Guest]: So now you have to do outreach.
[Guest]: You can monetize from anybody.
[Guest]: So now you have to think about what's going to monetize.
[Guest]: What art do they care about?
[Guest]: What kind of art do they care?
[Guest]: How do they engage with art?
[Guest]: What can you offer that somebody else can't?
[Guest]: So there's this idea, you know, of how we should, originality, there's no such thing
[Guest]: as originality.
[Guest]: All of us, whether you're a writer or an artist, you're not original.
[Guest]: You are borrowing, you are begging and stealing and copying from everybody else before you.
[Guest]: And then you may be, if you're very lucky, you move one inch forward into something that
[Guest]: nobody's ever done.
[Guest]: Maybe, maybe a very tiny fraction, and then they move the whole thing forward for everybody
[Guest]: else after them to copy that very easily.
[Guest]: So I tell people, don't try to be original, try to be authentic.
[Guest]: There's a very subtle difference between these two things.
[Guest]: Authenticity is what you have that nobody else has, because it is authentic to you.
[Guest]: Who are you?
[Guest]: Talk like you say what your journey is.
[Guest]: So tiny people drawings matter to people because not just because they're the best drawings
[Guest]: of people on a street.
[Guest]: No, there are far greater artists than me.
[Guest]: It matters because of the story I make around tiny people.
[Guest]: That story is unique, and that story gives value to these drawings that I make.
[Guest]: The idea that tiny people are a non fungible moment in space and time that these people
[Guest]: are a result of my observation from that street intersection that day while having that coffee
[Guest]: and looking in this direction.
[Guest]: And it can never happen again.
[Guest]: Because those people will not be in the street at the same time dress that same way the weather,
[Guest]: my ideas, my inclinations and my moods.
[Guest]: Even if you bring all of those things together, maybe I'll just happen to look at different
[Guest]: things then and draw different people.
[Guest]: Because I drew someone and five other people passed by also that I didn't draw.
[Guest]: Maybe I'll draw someone else.
[Guest]: This moment can never be replicated.
[Guest]: This drawing in this way, this collection of hundred people on this page can never ever
[Guest]: happen again.
[Guest]: It is from this day on this location.
[Guest]: This creates value around what that piece is.
[Guest]: This helps people understand the significance of that.
[Guest]: And this is me talking because now I'm thinking about what do I think about things like existentialism
[Guest]: phenomenology?
[Guest]: What do I think about space and time and this idea of things coming and never repeating
[Guest]: again?
[Guest]: This is me talking right?
[Guest]: This is make this makes it authentic to me that nobody else has.
[Guest]: This gives it value.
[Guest]: It's not about the technical skill of my drawing.
[Guest]: So there is a lot of liberation in the idea of being a creative entrepreneur.
[Guest]: But we get bogged down in these things that all I'll have to do things and I don't want
[Guest]: to do things like I just want to draw and as an outsider to art, I don't have much patience
[Guest]: for this.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, before we proceed, I think since we both mentioned Warsaw a couple of times,
[Amit Varma]: we should give a shout out to our mutual unseen friend, the founder, the 92 year old founder
[Amit Varma]: of the Warsaw Mumblecore movement, which existed long before Warsaw did.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the point you made is something that I tell people about all the time in my
[Amit Varma]: course as well that you know, like I remember while I was teaching the podcasting course
[Amit Varma]: in the first batch and somebody was like, trying to figure out where is a hole in the
[Amit Varma]: market.
[Amit Varma]: I was like, dude, the point is there are more than a million podcasts, any hole in the market
[Amit Varma]: if it exists will be filled before you get there.
[Amit Varma]: Interview podcasts are a dime a dozen policy podcasts are a dime a dozen.
[Amit Varma]: The hole in the market is really you, you know, the only thing that makes a podcast
[Amit Varma]: unique is you so you got to be authentic to yourself and that being authentic to yourself
[Guest]: is the only thing that works.
[Guest]: And it's a big enough challenge.
[Amit Varma]: It's super difficult to do this.
[Amit Varma]: It's super difficult.
[Amit Varma]: But I think if you flick a switch, no, it's super easy.
[Amit Varma]: You just have to flick that switch once like all the vlogs I watch, for example, on YouTube,
[Amit Varma]: they're all people who are authentic to themselves.
[Amit Varma]: I know exactly what they're like, or if someone listens to my podcast, I would imagine they
[Amit Varma]: know exactly what I'm like, because what you see is what you get.
[Amit Varma]: You can't fake it for too long.
[Amit Varma]: Even if you're on reality TV and a camera is on you, you know, you can't fake it for
[Amit Varma]: too long.
[Amit Varma]: Eventually you will relapse into being who you are.
[Amit Varma]: So I think that there's something in that and you know, you spoke about sort of authenticity
[Amit Varma]: being difficult.
[Amit Varma]: And earlier you had mentioned that whenever people in public find you drawing something
[Amit Varma]: that only appreciative, and I'm just thinking of what my instinctive reaction would be.
[Amit Varma]: And it would also be appreciative regardless of the drawer or the drawing.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason for that would be that most of the ugly competition around us is people
[Amit Varma]: constantly trying to project an image of themselves onto the world.
[Amit Varma]: That's all that social media is.
[Amit Varma]: It's just a constant battle of posturing.
[Amit Varma]: And when someone is sitting lost in a drawing, what they're doing is exactly the opposite.
[Amit Varma]: They're not projecting an image of themselves onto the world, but they're internalizing
[Amit Varma]: something that they see and they're working on it.
[Amit Varma]: And just that act itself, there's a certain beauty to it, which I kind of appreciate there.
[Amit Varma]: So there is this mindset that on the one hand, you are seeking the zen like state that just
[Amit Varma]: going out there and drawing what you see gives you.
[Amit Varma]: At the other end, there is a hustle, like in one of your posts is also the picture of
[Amit Varma]: you in a suit.
[Amit Varma]: Like I think the Marriott commissioned you to do some paintings and they invited you
[Amit Varma]: to this gig and you had a stall like thing where you're selling books and you're wearing
[Amit Varma]: a suit and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And again, that's not sneaky art.
[Amit Varma]: It's non-sneaky selling.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: And you looked at technology for that in the sense you're very active on Reddit.
[Amit Varma]: That's been a part of your gig.
[Amit Varma]: You've been thinking fairly deeply about building communities like through Discord.
[Amit Varma]: You've been examining mechanisms like, you know, the buy me a coffee thing.
[Amit Varma]: And you're completely right that the remarkable thing is that, you know, 20 years ago, as
[Amit Varma]: a creator, I would not be able to reach my audience directly, I would have to go through
[Amit Varma]: an intermediary, there would be gatekeepers who would have the tools of publishing.
[Amit Varma]: I think the blogging age made me kind of jump through that.
[Amit Varma]: But even in the blogging age, even in the aughties, you know, while my readers would
[Amit Varma]: place value on my work, because they're reading it, they're spending time, time is money,
[Amit Varma]: I would not be able to capture any of that value directly.
[Amit Varma]: And the only way to capture it was in a very clumsy way where intermediaries say, I write
[Amit Varma]: for the Times of India, they accumulate eyeballs, they sell advertising, a very small chunk
[Amit Varma]: of that comes to me.
[Amit Varma]: And the remarkable thing about these modern times is today, that's changed completely,
[Amit Varma]: you know, as I've experienced over the last year and a half as you've experienced.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit more about your feelings about what this new age holds for creators.
[Amit Varma]: Like how do you think differently now about your art than say, when you started?
[Guest]: So like, what is true today, is something that even with the tech could not have been
[Guest]: possible before, like, you mentioned, say, 2005-2006, you didn't have the means of monetization.
[Guest]: There have been services that have tried to do this before, there was this service called
[Guest]: Flatter.
[Guest]: And Flatter, the idea is beautiful.
[Guest]: The idea is that if you are a Flatter user, say you're a reader who reads a lot, you have
[Guest]: a Flatter account, and you would put in $30 a month.
[Guest]: This is my patronage to various creators that I will find on the internet.
[Guest]: Wherever you go, you find a YouTube video, you write, you see an article you like, if
[Guest]: they have a Flatter button, you click it.
[Guest]: And what it does is suppose you click 10 buttons over the month, it will split your $30 into
[Guest]: 10 places and give it to these people.
[Amit Varma]: If you click 500, then it will split it.
[Amit Varma]: That's a fantastic concept, before its time, I'm sure.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Guest]: The trouble with that was it was before its time.
[Guest]: For various reasons, it didn't work.
[Guest]: One was that you need to have a Flatter account.
[Guest]: So every person who wants to endorse has to sign up with this service.
[Guest]: That's a hurdle, won't happen.
[Guest]: Secondly, what happened was that the notion of microtransactions did not exist in the
[Guest]: way it does.
[Guest]: So that needed many things to happen together.
[Guest]: That needs firstly, it needs people to get tired of institutional content.
[Guest]: It needs people to be tired of what the algorithm is throwing at them.
[Guest]: So suppose all of this technology was possible in 2012, it would not work because people
[Guest]: were too enamored by Facebook.
[Guest]: What Facebook is throwing at them is still so fresh that why do I need to record is this
[Guest]: I'm getting all this for free.
[Guest]: So many forces had to come align in a sense, like so many stars had to align for this to
[Guest]: be the right time for this to happen, that we are very of the algorithm, we are tired
[Guest]: of the kind of content that is thrown at us.
[Guest]: And we are seeing so much new content and so many incredible formats and all these random
[Guest]: creators creating something extremely unexpected from so much like all this, all these TikTok
[Guest]: creators, the kind of thing like, so that people dismiss TikTok, right?
[Guest]: Like just think what TikTok is doing to Instagram.
[Guest]: Instagram meant that if I make a piece of art, which is which maybe took me five months
[Guest]: to make, I make an Instagram post of it, because that's the only place you can post.
[Guest]: And people are just scrolling past, maybe I get point one seconds from somebody.
[Guest]: That's it, if they really like me, maybe they give me one second, if they are absolutely
[Guest]: in love with me, maybe they will read my caption.
[Guest]: So five seconds.
[Guest]: That's it.
[Guest]: TikTok.
[Guest]: If you do a decent job, you are asking and you are getting 30 seconds of engagement,
[Guest]: you're getting 60 seconds of engagement, because now you can make 60 second videos.
[Guest]: That is orders of magnitude more.
[Guest]: And all it needs is for you to engage in its format, that same piece of art.
[Guest]: If you just set it to music.
[Guest]: And after you made it, you just make a video sort of moving over it and showing all its
[Guest]: nuances to the right mood set by the right song within a 60 second clip, suddenly you
[Guest]: are getting millions of people to engage with you for 60 seconds, they are in it for this
[Guest]: experience.
[Guest]: Like this is a result of its times and it is causing so much fantastic usage like this
[Guest]: idea that you can use a song and you can repurpose it to show art or you can repurpose it and
[Guest]: to dance to it.
[Guest]: These are all these are not envisioned by TikTok founders.
[Guest]: These are all things that innovative creators came up with to circumvent as they were thinking
[Guest]: the systems.
[Guest]: But what they did was they charted a new path of things that are possible to do.
[Guest]: Then came this idea that, oh, I'll also imitate what this person did.
[Guest]: And then there was this idea.
[Guest]: Oh, now there are trends.
[Guest]: You do dances according to TikTok, you do acts according to TikTok.
[Guest]: All of that became a thing because hashtags will proliferate.
[Guest]: So all of these systems, how they work organically to make things happen.
[Guest]: It's never because of one thing or one person or one idea.
[Guest]: It's because of all these various things aligning.
[Guest]: And as a creator today, all of these various things are aligning in beautiful ways.
[Guest]: So like I was saying before, like I have little patience for people who say that I'm just
[Guest]: an artist.
[Guest]: I don't want to think about the money.
[Guest]: Because what you are saying is I want to go back to 2005.
[Guest]: I don't want that to be.
[Guest]: I don't care about social media.
[Guest]: I don't care about monetization streams.
[Guest]: I just want to make art and I want some gallery owner to love me and then sell my art to people.
[Guest]: You are asking us to go back in time to those days.
[Guest]: And therefore, you want to resurrect the gates and the gatekeepers.
[Guest]: Your personal inabilities aside, I have no patience for that.
[Guest]: I'm sorry.
[Guest]: So hopefully we, but the future that we are thinking about, the future that we are starting
[Guest]: to see is not a singular idea future.
[Guest]: So hopefully that market will still exist and gallery owners will exist and curators
[Guest]: will exist and you will hopefully continue to make sales.
[Guest]: But since you will not, that is not the only market anymore.
[Guest]: It will not be the way you envisioned it would be.
[Guest]: And I for one, I'm glad for that because it allows people like me to be an artist.
[Guest]: It allows people like me to be a podcaster and it allows people like me to reach 1,000
[Guest]: true fans with a newsletter, things that would be impossible before.
[Guest]: So this is just a glorious time to be a creator.
[Guest]: Like I think it is the best time to, it's, it has, it has its risks because now that
[Guest]: this idea is there, what it does is it takes away this, the beauty of anonymity and maybe
[Guest]: this is me being nostalgic about what it used to be like.
[Guest]: So maybe I'm wrong, but if you're a blogger before and you don't have an audience, there
[Guest]: is a certain phase in your life when you need to not have an audience.
[Guest]: You need to just like, so that cynical phase of me, when I was making jokes and getting
[Guest]: things out, this got me in the flow of expressing myself.
[Guest]: If I was getting reactions then and people telling me, how can you make this joke?
[Guest]: How dare you?
[Guest]: Or someone reading it and maybe not saying that, let's say nobody sends me those reactions,
[Guest]: but I know 5,000 people are reading it.
[Guest]: I might be affected.
[Guest]: I might start thinking about, do I want to say this to people?
[Guest]: Should I say to people, what if something happens, someone's self-conscious like me,
[Guest]: if I had a notion of a vast audience, I would have trouble saying things like flip side
[Guest]: of thinking that you can get an audience if you do the right thing, is that you don't
[Guest]: enjoy the time that you don't have an audience.
[Guest]: And I think a lot of creators and writers and artists should cherish the period when
[Guest]: they don't have an audience.
[Guest]: That's the time when you can put in like lots of work, not have a fixed image of yourself
[Guest]: because once you have an audience, they have an image of you.
[Guest]: And I just spoke, I recorded with somebody recently who did really well on Instagram.
[Guest]: And she grew an audience to like 30, 40,000 followers.
[Guest]: And what that did was it chained her, it bound her.
[Guest]: Now she felt I have to give them what they want.
[Guest]: I can't do just what I want.
[Guest]: This drawing that I wanted to make, I can't share it because that's not what clicked last
[Guest]: time.
[Guest]: So I have to do what clicked last time and things escalated and it became really bad
[Guest]: for her.
[Guest]: She worked a lot.
[Guest]: She got into depression and anxiety, suffered from a burnout.
[Guest]: And she had to kind of take these reins back in her hands.
[Guest]: And we talk about that in our conversation.
[Guest]: This episode is going to come out next week.
[Guest]: In fact, that how important it is to engage with the audience in a new medium.
[Guest]: So this is another aspect of the creator economy today, which is beautiful in that you can
[Guest]: take your audience from one platform to another and engage with them in a different way.
[Guest]: This is absolutely not answering the question you asked, but I see the internet as two kinds
[Guest]: of places as a creator.
[Guest]: So one is a place where metaphorically you cast a net, you catch attention and you people
[Guest]: look at you, Twitter's like that, Facebook's like that, Instagram is like that, but these
[Guest]: are also split.
[Guest]: They look at you and then they look away.
[Guest]: So you have one second at best to do something, play your trick.
[Guest]: And that trick is to take them to the other part of the internet.
[Guest]: These I think of as destinations.
[Guest]: This is your blog.
[Guest]: This is your newsletter.
[Guest]: This is your podcast.
[Guest]: And a small fraction of these people whose attention you catch will go with you over
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: They will hit that link and they will go somewhere.
[Guest]: But this is then your opportunity to engage with them on new terms.
[Guest]: So a lot of people are frustrated with how things are today that, oh, the internet is
[Guest]: such a terrible place for content and this and that.
[Guest]: But it's because you're doing things on Instagram that can't be done on Instagram.
[Guest]: You can't talk to people on Instagram.
[Guest]: That's not what they go to Instagram to do.
[Guest]: They go there to scroll and you are saying, don't scroll.
[Guest]: Zuckerberg is making them scroll, giving them dopamine for scrolling.
[Guest]: And you are saying, don't scroll.
[Guest]: You're making it an unpleasant experience.
[Guest]: They feel guilt whenever they see your post and therefore they avoid your post even more.
[Guest]: So you have to take them to that platform where they will engage with you.
[Guest]: So you must have seen this, like, like you were talking about how you were doing shorter
[Guest]: form content before, because you thought there's no market for this, right?
[Guest]: And in fact, one of the first times we had engaged with each other on Twitter, you had
[Guest]: posted something about a short attention span.
[Guest]: And I had replied saying that I don't think there is a short attention span.
[Guest]: And that later became a blog post I wrote in, I formulated further ideas from it.
[Guest]: Like I told you in that tweet, there's no short attention span because more PhD thesis
[Guest]: are written today than ever before.
[Guest]: And read more big books and big series are written today and read by more people.
[Guest]: And more long TV series are binge watched.
[Guest]: So that short attention span is not true.
[Guest]: It's an observation bias because short attention span people make themselves known and float
[Guest]: to the top and occupy all make a lot of noise because they have a short attention span.
[Amit Varma]: That's a good point.
[Amit Varma]: I don't remember the exchange at all, which I will pretend proves my point.
[Guest]: So that was a mistaken way of thinking.
[Guest]: So this exchange sort of became the first lines of a post I wrote about how there is
[Guest]: not a short attention span problem.
[Guest]: There is a short attention span, but we misinterpret the symptoms and we misdiagnose solutions.
[Guest]: What we have is not a chronic short attention span problem.
[Guest]: What we have is a short consideration span.
[Guest]: And what I mean by that is the amount of time somebody will give you before considering
[Guest]: whether to give you more time.
[Guest]: Because there are so many things they can do.
[Guest]: They can scroll away.
[Guest]: There are other YouTube recommendations that are on the websites, there's Instagram with
[Amit Varma]: other things, there's Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: I think that might be only true at the first moment of discovery, the first time to discover
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: I don't think it's true even after.
[Guest]: For example, if someone is reading an article, if you have a long chunk of text, they will
[Guest]: simply close the tab, they'll do something else instead.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: But if it's Tim Hufford, I'm going to read the full thing, even if it's a long chunk
[Amit Varma]: of text, because it's Tim Hufford.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So you have a prior notion of the reward that that person will give you for sticking with
[Amit Varma]: their text.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: But a lot of new readers will simply not do it because in today's time, there are other
[Guest]: things they can consider.
[Guest]: And therefore it will maybe, maybe they need somebody to tell them who this person is.
[Guest]: And maybe they need somebody to validate this person from before somebody who respect tweeting
[Guest]: this person out and saying that, Hey, this is worth your time, give it time.
[Guest]: And then they go to it, whatever.
[Guest]: But generally a good writer who doesn't do things to recalibrate the consideration of
[Guest]: his readers is going to lose readers.
[Guest]: So there are many people who write newsletters now who say have a chunk of long text and
[Guest]: they don't get the readership.
[Guest]: And the good advice around it is that you need to every few minutes or every whatever
[Guest]: reading time, you need to give them another reason why they should keep reading.
[Amit Varma]: I think this way of thinking is an example of a model that is useful, but not necessarily
[Amit Varma]: the whole truth.
[Amit Varma]: Because the way I look at the content I discover and the things I listen to, and typically
[Amit Varma]: a lot of it will come when a friend will recommend something highly and say, Hey, check this
[Amit Varma]: out.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, regardless of my attention span or consideration span, I'll trust that
[Amit Varma]: judgment and go with it.
[Amit Varma]: And if it is someone whose work I'm familiar with, which is actually most of the content
[Amit Varma]: we consume, or at least I consume, I'm not sure this would be necessarily an issue.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, so here's the thing.
[Amit Varma]: I was like number one to respond to what you said earlier, I kind of agree with you like
[Amit Varma]: one of my guests on the show in an episode I've already recorded, but will release next
[Amit Varma]: week, December 6.
[Amit Varma]: But before this episode releases is also a former writer of Gussaki Maaf, which is Abhinandan
[Amit Varma]: Sekri, who runs News Laundry.
[Amit Varma]: And he and I were chatting about how if when we were 20, if we posted what we thought on
[Amit Varma]: Twitter, we would have been cancelled for sure.
[Amit Varma]: We would, you know, screenshots of that time would surface today, and we'd be screwed.
[Amit Varma]: Because you need this period of time, like you said, when you're anonymous, when no one's
[Amit Varma]: reading you, when you can discover what you're doing, either in terms of your thinking or
[Amit Varma]: your view of the world, or of your art and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And that's incredibly useful.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, like my blog, fortunately enough, right from the start had a pretty
[Amit Varma]: big audience, so we're seen in the unseen us today, though it's now lost in the mists
[Amit Varma]: of time.
[Amit Varma]: But that was very useful for me, actually, because that kept me going.
[Amit Varma]: The fact that like people would write to me, you know, at my peak, after I'd done five
[Amit Varma]: years of it, like between 2004 and 2009, I did some five posts a day on my blog.
[Amit Varma]: So I had 8000 posts in that period.
[Amit Varma]: And at my peak, I had some 20,000 views a day, which was a lot of which was responsibility,
[Amit Varma]: which was that, you know, people would write to me and say that, hey, I live in New Zealand,
[Amit Varma]: and I don't read any of the Indian newspapers, I just go to India Uncut, and I see what's
[Amit Varma]: happening there.
[Amit Varma]: And this, of course, was, you know, back in the day before social media really took off
[Amit Varma]: before Twitter and all that.
[Amit Varma]: So this was a great commitment device that I would write because I felt they were listeners.
[Amit Varma]: The other aspect of this whole thing of artists needing to be salesmen, is that, yeah, I get
[Amit Varma]: it that these opportunities are open to you.
[Amit Varma]: And you can't just say, right, I'll do my art, you want it to reach someone, you want
[Amit Varma]: it to have an effect, you want to do justice to the art that you produce and get it to
[Amit Varma]: its audience.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, one issue that can emerge with that is that people then start depending too
[Amit Varma]: much on validation, that they'll do something, and they'll market it, and they'll say, shit,
[Amit Varma]: I'm getting 10 views, I'm getting 13 views, or like Puneet Superstar in the earlier discussed
[Amit Varma]: story, three views per video.
[Amit Varma]: And then you say that I'm not going to do this anymore.
[Amit Varma]: And that's disastrous, because the advice I give young creators is that find something
[Amit Varma]: that you love doing for its own sake, and then just stick to it and don't look for validation
[Amit Varma]: for a long, long time.
[Amit Varma]: Because creators tend to overestimate the short term and underestimate the long term.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're constantly making your production depend on validation, and validation will
[Amit Varma]: not come early on, one, because it takes time to organically build an audience and two,
[Amit Varma]: because you will suck at the start, like I'm sure even your old drawings suck.
[Amit Varma]: So you'll suck at the start, you got to keep doing it again and again, to become good.
[Amit Varma]: So I think it can become a bit of a double edged sword.
[Amit Varma]: But the important thing I would advise all creators, and in a sense, you've lived this
[Amit Varma]: with through your work, is that bloody hell, just do something you love.
[Amit Varma]: That's the starting point, you know, and then shit happens around it, you know, you build
[Amit Varma]: something organically.
[Amit Varma]: And yes, you can have a marketing mindset, a sales mindset, figure out how do I grow
[Amit Varma]: my brand?
[Amit Varma]: How do I build a community around me?
[Amit Varma]: How do I monetize it?
[Amit Varma]: But to me, all of those come later.
[Amit Varma]: The first thing is that do something you love.
[Amit Varma]: And if you love it, keep doing it.
[Guest]: That's the whole point of loving something, absolutely, absolutely.
[Guest]: And in fact, this is becoming easier today than before.
[Guest]: Because while we were still in this earlier mindset that you need to appeal to these institutions
[Guest]: that will sponsor you, you needed to therefore become viral, like that was the only means
[Guest]: of success and virality meant appealing to millions of people, which means a broad denominator
[Guest]: of people.
[Guest]: And therefore, your work loses its unique charm.
[Guest]: So maybe you sacrifice on the thing that you enjoy the most in the interest of fitting
[Guest]: into a groove, which will go viral into formats that will go viral into styles that are trending.
[Guest]: So therefore, I should do this.
[Guest]: And therefore, it becomes less about your personal joy and more about these goals, which
[Guest]: you need to reach in order to be able to do it.
[Guest]: And then you sort of suspend your joy in the short term thinking, maybe once I reach this
[Guest]: audience, then I'll be able to do these things.
[Guest]: And then that never comes, because the never ending cycle, both of these points are true,
[Guest]: like exactly, it's a double edged sword.
[Guest]: So I was thinking about you getting 20,000 views in 2006 2007, the circumstance around
[Guest]: that is so useful that there was no economy based on performative reactions.
[Guest]: There was no Twitter.
[Guest]: And therefore, I mean, yeah, so now because there is Twitter, there is a whole reputational
[Guest]: economy based on reacting of virtue signaling and performative reactions to earnest content
[Guest]: may be foolish, maybe wrong, maybe out of context, it is anathema even, but whatever
[Guest]: something someone says, you are incentivized to take it out of context, you are rewarded
[Guest]: for taking it to the worst possible attributions to those words.
[Guest]: And whether or not you are right about it, there is a lot to gain from doing these things.
[Guest]: And this just, it's not that these people are bad people, it's just that this algorithm
[Guest]: is so rewarding if you do this, and it therefore it becomes the way that they interact with
[Guest]: other people.
[Guest]: Like I often think about why this happens.
[Guest]: There are so many people who and you've spoken so much about and we've talked actually together
[Guest]: about this kind of performative virtue signaling that happens on Twitter and why it happens.
[Guest]: It's because I feel like we are so we've been thrust into the social media.
[Guest]: And nobody is quite prepared for what it means that 1000 people will read what you are thinking.
[Guest]: And those 1000 people are not in your locality, they are not 1000 people like you, who have
[Guest]: had your education or your various socioeconomic parameters, a matchup, none of those things.
[Guest]: They are from entirely different worlds.
[Guest]: What social media is doing is, it is throwing these worlds together, these worlds are colliding
[Guest]: to use George Costanza's phrase.
[Guest]: And that's makes George angry.
[Guest]: That's a terrible, unfortunate situation.
[Guest]: Someone is young on Twitter, and they see somebody tweet something that hurts them.
[Guest]: Maybe Amit says something about someone that they idolize, and they don't like it.
[Guest]: Because that's not Amit talking to his people.
[Guest]: This that is this entity who has entered their world, saying something about something that
[Guest]: they feel a certain way about.
[Guest]: And they don't have the wherewithal, the understanding or maybe the time and mental energy to put
[Guest]: it in its own context.
[Guest]: Because this whole game is about reacting in your context, you are reacting to your
[Guest]: followers, right?
[Guest]: This is how Twitter works.
[Guest]: You are not saying something to the person.
[Guest]: This is why I like Reddit so much as compared to Twitter.
[Guest]: For example, you're not saying something to the person on Twitter, you are saying something
[Guest]: for your people to hear you say to that person.
[Guest]: So performativeness is not like this terrible thing they did.
[Guest]: Performativeness is what they have been forced into.
[Guest]: I respond to someone on Twitter, I typed out half my reply, and I think, you know, my followers
[Guest]: are going to see this.
[Guest]: Do I want people to see this?
[Guest]: Do I care to say this if other people are going to see this and then they'll follow
[Guest]: this thread and what will that say about me?
[Guest]: So this, I am being forced into a performance.
[Guest]: I didn't ask for it.
[Guest]: I don't want it.
[Guest]: I don't want to see what other people reply to other people's tweets.
[Guest]: Like I literally just want to see people's tweets.
[Guest]: I don't want to see what they like.
[Guest]: I don't want to see who they follow.
[Guest]: I don't want to see who they reply to.
[Guest]: Because sometimes you find out unpleasant things about people you're speaking to also
[Guest]: and you don't want to shatter that image like you.
[Guest]: I just want to know you as this thing.
[Guest]: I don't care to know more about you.
[Guest]: Please let's keep distance.
[Guest]: But Twitter doesn't let you.
[Guest]: It throws this performativeness and this really terrible situations at you.
[Guest]: And people are reacting to it.
[Guest]: Reacting is this privilege, you know, like we live in a hierarchical country.
[Guest]: Like we were talking right at the start of this conversation about how the cynicism meant
[Guest]: putting someone down, right, because in a hierarchical mindset, that's the way you have
[Guest]: value.
[Guest]: There is no objective value.
[Guest]: There is only am I better than this or am I worse than that?
[Guest]: So always we are trying to climb over someone else, because that's the only way we can get
[Guest]: a sense.
[Guest]: Like if I have climbed over this person, I am better than so many people.
[Guest]: If I can dunk on Amit Verma on Twitter, then I can in front of my crowd look smarter than
[Guest]: Amit Verma on Twitter.
[Guest]: That does not take into account what Amit feels about it.
[Guest]: That does not take into account whether I misread or correctly interpreted what Amit
[Guest]: said.
[Guest]: It does not care about these things, because in his world, in their world, this person
[Guest]: is trying to climb a little bit higher.
[Guest]: And these things are sadly incentivized.
[Guest]: And these things, when someone gets the first chance to react to someone, again, in a hierarchical
[Guest]: country, you don't get many opportunities to express yourself.
[Guest]: Suddenly you can.
[Guest]: You can respond not only to Amit Verma.
[Guest]: You can even respond to Amitabh Bachchan.
[Guest]: And you can make fun of, oh, you put tweet numbers, ha ha ha, old man.
[Guest]: And whatever.
[Guest]: You can.
[Guest]: Everybody's in that stage that I was in, that cynical stage, like nobody else matters.
[Guest]: I am the only real person.
[Guest]: These are all figments of my imagination.
[Guest]: All these are the humans.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I can behave in a way that I would never behave in real life.
[Guest]: Absolutely not.
[Amit Varma]: In real life, I would never be rude to Amit Verma if I come across him.
[Guest]: But Twitter is giving you this license, ki bol do kuch bhi, kyunki ha ha ha hoga thoda.
[Guest]: And then you can close the app and then you can go back to your real world.
[Guest]: This is all fake.
[Guest]: These are not real people.
[Guest]: So it reinforces this mindset that you are the only real thing here.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, two aspects of this.
[Amit Varma]: And one is like you correctly pointed out.
[Amit Varma]: If someone feels attacked, these are different worlds colliding.
[Amit Varma]: If some worldviews are like religion, you know, if you attack somebody's God, of course
[Amit Varma]: they will get offended.
[Amit Varma]: So just as a question of politeness, I would not say bad things about somebody's religion.
[Amit Varma]: But in a similar way, if you say something about that disagrees with someone's ideological
[Amit Varma]: point of view or challenges that, you're basically doing exactly the same thing.
[Amit Varma]: So it becomes personal.
[Amit Varma]: But what is worse, and I think Jonathan Haidt pointed to it that, you know, the seminal
[Amit Varma]: moment in all of this and social media becoming toxic was the Facebook like button and the
[Amit Varma]: Twitter retweet button.
[Amit Varma]: Because suddenly that validation becomes a big deal.
[Amit Varma]: And if there is one trend I absolutely hate about Twitter, it's about dunking on people.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we should be discussing ideas, we should be discussing things, policies, events.
[Amit Varma]: Instead we are dunking on individuals all the time.
[Amit Varma]: Like I see so many people dunking on Chetan Bhagat, for example.
[Amit Varma]: Bhai, if you don't like him, don't read him.
[Amit Varma]: There's no need to, you know, why are you giving him space in your head?
[Amit Varma]: You know, and frankly, my sense of Chetan Bhagat, and I think I shared this in clear
[Amit Varma]: writing group that we're both part of today, is that, you know, beyond the point, the bottom
[Amit Varma]: line is he's right about the elites.
[Amit Varma]: You know, he's gone out there, and he's done what he's done.
[Amit Varma]: And he's a doer, he's writing books, he's changing the culture, no matter what we think
[Amit Varma]: of the books he's writing or the way he's changing the culture, while we elites are
[Amit Varma]: sipping up in our guladas.
[Amit Varma]: He's also an elite.
[Amit Varma]: He's also an elite, that's a different matter.
[Amit Varma]: My point is that stop dunking on the guy.
[Amit Varma]: If you think he's worth nothing, why waste your mind space on him?
[Guest]: Life is short.
[Guest]: You are correct about this.
[Guest]: But you are correct because of a trajectory you have taken over time.
[Guest]: And these other people are on their own trips.
[Guest]: Remember, you are not real.
[Guest]: You are a figment of their imagination in their world.
[Guest]: True.
[Unknown]: There are other people.
[Amit Varma]: Not to them.
[Amit Varma]: Not on Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: If you spend enough time on Twitter, you stop thinking there are other people.
[Unknown]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: They are all various forces.
[Guest]: So you don't get to fight, say, fascism in real life.
[Guest]: But if somebody tweets about fascism, this is your opportunity to fight fascism.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So fascism being an easy one, we can all agree upon, but any other idea.
[Guest]: So you said, you know, you wouldn't dunk on someone's religion.
[Guest]: But there are so many religions.
[Guest]: It's not just religion.
[Amit Varma]: It's not just Hinduism.
[Amit Varma]: It's the only religion.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Cricket is religion.
[Guest]: Football is religion.
[Amit Varma]: Virat Kohli's religion.
[Amit Varma]: Dhoni's religion.
[Amit Varma]: I've been attacked by trolls of all these.
[Amit Varma]: By fans of.
[Guest]: I've been trolled by fans of all these people you just named.
[Guest]: And this is this is simply because you are not real in their world.
[Guest]: You are just this thing that has collided their universe.
[Guest]: And now it is behaving in this way that they don't like.
[Guest]: If you were to say this in person, you would be a real person.
[Amit Varma]: And they would react to you in a more humane way.
[Amit Varma]: I think at one level, see, some of the aggressive reactions come because you have challenged
[Amit Varma]: the world view and you're from another world and they respond to that.
[Amit Varma]: But I think part of it also comes from whether they have a world view or they don't have
[Amit Varma]: it or they're pretending to have it or they're pretending to be part of a tribe, other incentives
[Amit Varma]: of Twitter and Facebook, where you always want to raise your status within your in group.
[Amit Varma]: And how do you do this?
[Amit Varma]: You do this by abusing the people in the other group and abusing people within your own group
[Amit Varma]: for not being pure enough, like you're kind of lucky you're not bigger than you are.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise, there would be one set of vokes attacking you for not showing women in your
[Amit Varma]: drawings because they saw a couple where there weren't any women.
[Amit Varma]: And another set accusing you of being a voyeur because you just had women in your drawings.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you can interpret anything anyway in bad faith.
[Amit Varma]: And that's the problem.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I would like to think that all arguments should be in good faith, you assume goodwill.
[Amit Varma]: But if you assume that the other person is malicious, and if you have determined that
[Amit Varma]: you're going to attack them to show your own virtue, I think it's a problem.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't agree entirely with what you say, that they are not bad people in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that inherently people inherently people aren't bad or good, responding to incentive.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, that's I think that's what I mean that I don't want to say they are inherently
[Guest]: bad people.
[Guest]: They are just responding to these incentives.
[Amit Varma]: So for example, but we have the same incentives, right?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I would think that at some level, you have to judge a person according to their
[Amit Varma]: actions.
[Amit Varma]: I see people being incredibly rude and abusive in a way that they would not in real life.
[Amit Varma]: I have seen people who know me in real life, randomly abusing me on Twitter or saying nasty
[Amit Varma]: things.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm like, what is wrong with you?
[Guest]: You know, would you say this to me on my face?
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So you said two things that I very deeply agree with both of them are statements of
[Guest]: Sartre existence precedes essence.
[Guest]: So your actions matter.
[Amit Varma]: And that I didn't even say existence precedes essence.
[Amit Varma]: You said that actions matter.
[Guest]: And then you said that good faith arguments are not bad faith arguments.
[Guest]: And both of these things like judging people by their actions and being militantly against
[Guest]: bad faith arguments.
[Guest]: It was very important to Sartre also.
[Guest]: And I absolutely agree.
[Guest]: Now, I don't want to suggest that it's the essence of people is good.
[Guest]: So therefore, they are good.
[Guest]: I just want to say that people are in different trips and different phases of different trips.
[Guest]: So I have I have reached this understanding that Twitter is not useful this way.
[Guest]: But that's because the rest of my world aligns in a certain way.
[Guest]: And I think this, and I have this beautiful art that makes me appreciate other people.
[Guest]: So therefore, I don't think of it in this way.
[Guest]: But so I want to what I want to talk about, therefore, is that in this pursuit, I have
[Guest]: discovered good ways of engaging.
[Guest]: And that's why I like Reddit so much more than Twitter.
[Guest]: And Reddit does these precise things differently from Twitter.
[Guest]: You can't be performative to your audience because you don't carry your audience with
[Guest]: you into Reddit.
[Guest]: You talk inside subreddits, and therefore you talk within a context to a community.
[Guest]: You don't talk to your people.
[Guest]: You have to address other people.
[Guest]: So you have to acknowledge their reality and their existence in your in in the real world.
[Guest]: And you have to obey the laws of that engagement in that subreddit.
[Guest]: And there are very strict rules enforced by voluntary moderators, which keeps things civil,
[Guest]: which keeps things relatively normal.
[Guest]: And what this does is the same kind of person who behaves a certain way on Twitter cannot
[Guest]: behave that way on Reddit and get away with it.
[Guest]: And people who are on Reddit have to engage in at least well, there are parts of Reddit
[Guest]: where this is not true.
[Guest]: But vast parts of Reddit, they have to engage in good faith arguments, they have to respect
[Guest]: the sanctity of a subreddit topic, they can't just bullshit around it.
[Guest]: It's disincentive not because it's good or bad, because it's disincentivized, because
[Guest]: you will be downvoted into oblivion.
[Guest]: The like button on Reddit does good things.
[Guest]: The like button on Facebook does terrible things.
[Guest]: The retweet button on Twitter does terrible things because you use it to perform it perform
[Guest]: in front of your audience, not even retweet, maybe the quote tweet button, the idea that
[Guest]: you just add a comment and then you put their thing and then it's like, Oh, this is about
[Guest]: this and I'm dunking on them.
[Guest]: So that does ugly things.
[Guest]: Reddit has a cross posting function, which is just about taking from one subreddit to
[Guest]: another subreddit.
[Guest]: And that does not do that terrible thing.
[Guest]: It is a it is a positive function.
[Guest]: It helps, again, bring attention back to the work of that person and how it fits the notion
[Guest]: of this other subreddit.
[Guest]: So for example, some I drew a drawing and I posted it in our Vancouver, and somebody
[Guest]: cross posted it to our slash mildly interesting.
[Guest]: This is a mildly interesting thing I saw you might like it.
[Guest]: This was good.
[Guest]: It added value to my work.
[Guest]: So I learned Oh, my work is mildly interesting.
[Guest]: Since then I posted on mildly interesting myself, I went right to the top, I am proud
[Guest]: to say that I am this year's among this year's top 10 most mildly interesting things on the
[Guest]: internet.
[Amit Varma]: Congratulations.
[Amit Varma]: Now there is a degree to mildly.
[Amit Varma]: I thought you at some point get promoted to extremely interesting, but no, I tried I try
[Guest]: I posted to r slash interesting as fuck.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, that's also there.
[Amit Varma]: And people told me that you are not interesting as fuck.
[Amit Varma]: You're mildly interesting.
[Amit Varma]: You are mildly interesting.
[Unknown]: So you're back to where you belong.
[Guest]: I was told this and they are in fact, right in this case, I am happy to be mildly interesting
[Guest]: instead.
[Guest]: It does great good.
[Guest]: It has brought me lots of fans and readers and hundreds of subscribers to the newsletter
[Guest]: also.
[Guest]: So this this aspect of the internet, you know, understanding what is good, what is bad.
[Guest]: This also needs you to see the other aspects.
[Guest]: This also needs you to maybe you need to be in the business of putting out content of
[Guest]: sharing opinions.
[Guest]: Once you have shared an opinion, you feel vulnerable about it.
[Guest]: And you see how someone destroys it.
[Guest]: Maybe you are less keen on destroying someone else's opinion.
[Guest]: But if you don't, if you're not in the business of sharing opinions, then maybe you have not
[Guest]: arrived at that understanding.
[Guest]: The trouble with Reddit is not that these people behave in this way.
[Guest]: The trouble with Reddit is that we are exposed to everything anybody does.
[Guest]: And this exposure, this idea that all these worlds are colliding with us is just fundamentally
[Guest]: all wrong.
[Guest]: Like it's, it's just terrible.
[Guest]: It's bound to create these situations because it's not even malice, you know, like it's
[Guest]: bad faith arguments.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: It's bullshit.
[Guest]: Like celebration of trolling as a valid form of dunking on someone like people say, Oh,
[Guest]: we're just trolling.
[Guest]: Why do you mind?
[Guest]: And like, they don't see it as a negative thing.
[Guest]: They see it as a just shit posting or just like, whatever, I did it for shits and giggles.
[Guest]: So it's fine.
[Guest]: But I think like platforms like this are just terrible to be on because if this is the only
[Guest]: platform you're on, it makes you not see other people as real people, just as things for
[Amit Varma]: you to use.
[Amit Varma]: It dehumanizes them.
[Amit Varma]: Like the categorical imperative you shared, like they're the means to an end.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Why would you not send them to a gas chamber if things came to that then?
[Guest]: Because they're not real people.
[Guest]: They're not real people.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on to a bunch of final topics.
[Amit Varma]: And first, you know, we've been speaking about web 2.2 all the time.
[Amit Varma]: What is this bullshit?
[Amit Varma]: It's so yesterday.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk about web 3.2.
[Amit Varma]: Listen, so one of the things that I was looking forward to when you agreed to come on the
[Amit Varma]: show was you promised to explain NFTs to me.
[Amit Varma]: So the platform is all yours.
[Guest]: Kind of what the fuck are NFTs?
[Guest]: Person disclaimer, I am not the best person to talk about it because I'm not fully on
[Guest]: board with the idea.
[Guest]: I oscillate wildly, I am sometimes enamored by them, and I want to get into it.
[Guest]: And sometimes I'm disgusted by what I see, and I want to have nothing to do with it.
[Guest]: But I have explored how I would enter it.
[Guest]: And I have read a lot and thought a lot about what it means.
[Amit Varma]: So explain it as if you're explaining it to a lame layperson, which I'm sure many of my
[Amit Varma]: listeners would be in which I'm extremely close to being myself.
[Amit Varma]: So NFTs, of course, stand for non fungible token.
[Guest]: Now, just take it away from there.
[Guest]: The basic idea, what is non fungible?
[Guest]: So fungible is like currency.
[Guest]: Suppose you have a 100 rupee note, you can exchange it for another 100.
[Amit Varma]: We have a 500 rupee note.
[Amit Varma]: The 1000 and 500 were demonetized and we had 2000 and new 500.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, we have new 500?
[Amit Varma]: We have new 500.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, I'm sorry.
[Amit Varma]: I've been out of touch.
[Guest]: Don't offend me.
[Guest]: I'm very close to my 500 rupee note.
[Guest]: So 500 rupee note can be exchanged for any other 500 rupee note for the same value.
[Guest]: So it is fungible.
[Guest]: Non fungible token is anything that cannot be exchanged for something just like it.
[Guest]: It has its own unique value.
[Guest]: So non fungible tokens have been mostly used in the term of art right now, but they have
[Guest]: all kinds of uses.
[Guest]: So a non fungible token can be simply your right to say an artist sells a non fungible
[Guest]: token for something, something value.
[Guest]: And now that token gives you the right, it works as a backstage pass to all their concerts.
[Guest]: As long as you own that token, that NFT and hundreds of people might, you can go to all
[Guest]: their concerts and you have a special seat and you can always get a backstage entry.
[Guest]: So that thing does not have the same value always.
[Guest]: Its value will keep changing.
[Guest]: If the artist gets better, its value will increase.
[Guest]: It will be traded by other people like maybe I don't care about this artist anymore.
[Guest]: Why don't you buy it from me?
[Guest]: I'll sell it to you for $10 million because now he's the biggest artist in the world.
[Guest]: So this value is always fluctuating.
[Guest]: So that's what makes it non fungible.
[Guest]: Like it's not easily exchangeable for just something, there's no static value to it.
[Guest]: Now what it rests upon is your notion of the value of digital content in the digital realm.
[Guest]: Does digital art or a digital product have value in your life?
[Guest]: It takes a lot of meaning from games, for example, in lots of games.
[Guest]: If you are really vested in your character, what is what is called MMORPGs, massively
[Guest]: multiplayer online role playing games.
[Guest]: You have various characters that you build over time, they gain experience, they gain
[Guest]: in these various medieval sort of setting universes.
[Guest]: They get all these items of clothing or weapons, and you can set them up and you create and
[Guest]: you give them some kind of value.
[Guest]: And sometimes you have things that you can pay for.
[Guest]: You can get this clothing, which is like this, this, this, but you pay $5 for it or you pay
[Guest]: $10 for it or more like who knows whatever, but do you want to do it?
[Guest]: It's not really you're not holding it, you're not actually possessing it.
[Guest]: It's just in this realm, in this game, in this context, in this character, it's virtual.
[Guest]: But it can have real value, right?
[Guest]: Like it depends on how much time you spend on that game, how vested you are, how many
[Guest]: what social networks you have within it, it can have real value to you.
[Guest]: So if you could buy the blue tick on Twitter, for example, so that has real value, but it's
[Guest]: a digital thing.
[Guest]: It's not a real good.
[Guest]: So if you believe in the idea that virtual worlds can have items that have real monetary
[Guest]: value, then we are thinking about the ways that we interact with virtual worlds in the
[Guest]: future and web 3.0 and metaverse and all these ideas are about more and more virtual worlds
[Guest]: existing in our reality, whether it's virtual reality, whether it's augmented reality, and
[Guest]: what is the value of getting something over there and flexing it or using it in some way.
[Guest]: So this is where this is what NFTs offer you in art.
[Guest]: At the moment, NFTs are or art or writing or audio, NFTs are a way of associating with
[Guest]: an artist or a writer or a creator that you like because you own something that they have.
[Guest]: So it's almost like buying a share.
[Guest]: If someone could buy a share in Amit Verma, that share will always change in value, but
[Guest]: they buy it with the idea that now they believe in you.
[Guest]: Now they believe in what you are going to do in the future, and they expect it to appreciate
[Guest]: in value.
[Guest]: They might never sell it, but they expect it to not be a money thrown down the drain.
[Guest]: Meanwhile, that money is money that you can use to become a better artist.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, so let's look at it like this.
[Amit Varma]: Let's say I buy a share in a company, I buy a share in a company because there are expectations
[Amit Varma]: of all its earnings will be like this, these will be the dividends, you know, there'll
[Amit Varma]: be a resale market for my share, it could go up, it could go down.
[Amit Varma]: But what I hear a lot about on the internet, and I'm trying to wrap my head around it,
[Amit Varma]: is that an artist will create an artwork which anyone can see and download, but they sell
[Amit Varma]: the NFT to it, which one person will buy.
[Amit Varma]: Now this is a digital artwork, anyone can download copies if they want, and yet one
[Amit Varma]: person holds and has bought an NFT for it.
[Amit Varma]: So what special privilege does he get from the NFT apart from having the NFT?
[Guest]: Yeah, firstly, there's one aspect of the NFT world that says, oh, right clickers, as they
[Guest]: are called right clickers are evil, and that is don't do it.
[Guest]: And we need to disable right click.
[Guest]: Some people are even doing that.
[Guest]: That's not something I believe in.
[Guest]: I think that's nonsense.
[Guest]: That's never going to happen.
[Guest]: You need to have value outside of this fact.
[Guest]: Because the internet is not about not letting other people have content.
[Guest]: Right click save is the essence of a lot of art I have absorbed and learned, you're not
[Guest]: going to disable right click save, you're not going to disable screenshots and things
[Guest]: like that, that has to always remain.
[Guest]: It's the essence of knowledge and the promise of the internet that you are going to have
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: So it has to have some other value in my mind, this kind of value is nonsense, this the demand
[Guest]: for it is also nonsense.
[Guest]: But there are there is other value being created around even an NFT of a blog post you wrote,
[Guest]: for example, right.
[Guest]: So you have 10,000 blog posts, every week, you write a newsletter post, and every week,
[Guest]: somebody can buy an NFT of it.
[Guest]: That thing can does not mean that nobody else gets to read that newsletter, or save that
[Guest]: newsletter or print that newsletter.
[Guest]: But within a context, there is a place there is a ledger, where you are acknowledged as
[Guest]: the owner of that post.
[Guest]: I suppose I buy that newsletters NFT that posts NFT.
[Guest]: So I am acknowledged as the owner, there is a list somewhere in which I am there and those
[Guest]: other right click people are not there, or those savers printers are not there.
[Guest]: That list can have value if you use it that way.
[Guest]: So if Amit decides that everybody who owns an Amit NFTs, we are going to all have brunch
[Guest]: together, I get invited, right, the people who saved it don't get invited, you are incentivizing
[Guest]: people to buy that NFT, and you are creating value around that NFT.
[Amit Varma]: But I could achieve the same thing by another mechanism.
[Amit Varma]: For example, I could say take a Patreon membership and all my members of this particular tier
[Amit Varma]: get brunch with me and another particular tier gets whatever with me.
[Amit Varma]: And I could do that also by that I mean, the point is, say I write a blog post and you
[Amit Varma]: buy the NFT for it, you don't have the copyright for it, you are not going to get revenues
[Amit Varma]: from it if I publish it in a book or something, you know, you don't stop it from being published,
[Amit Varma]: you don't stop other people from reading it.
[Amit Varma]: Although the NFT entitles you to is the ownership of the NFT, which only entitles you to the
[Amit Varma]: ownership of the NFT, which only we can reach five hours this way.
[Guest]: And ownership of the NFT on that blockchain.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And then there are many blockchains.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, so I can sell different NFTs on different blockchains.
[Guest]: Of the same thing.
[Guest]: On different blockchains.
[Guest]: So are there many blockchains which have?
[Guest]: Oh, yes.
[Guest]: Oh, so as an artist, I could.
[Guest]: Bitcoin is a blockchain.
[Guest]: Ethereum is another blockchain.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: Got it.
[Amit Varma]: And there are hundreds.
[Guest]: But most people are using Ethereum for this.
[Guest]: Well, for art, the most popular one is Ethereum.
[Unknown]: Okay.
[Guest]: And for other uses, the most popular one so far is Bitcoin.
[Guest]: But there is a lot of stuff on other blockchains also.
[Guest]: And the Dogecoin is another blockchain, for example.
[Guest]: And there's Solana and Cordana and whatnot.
[Amit Varma]: This whole thing seems very perception based to me like you get some boasting value that
[Amit Varma]: hey, I own the NFT of Amitabh Bachchan tweet number 8 million blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
[Guest]: And so at the moment in this nascent stage, it does have only that.
[Guest]: It doesn't offer very much more, which is one of the reasons why I'm very skeptical
[Guest]: about a lot of aspects around it.
[Guest]: You don't really own it.
[Guest]: That is absolutely true.
[Guest]: You only own a place in a ledger.
[Guest]: That ledger can have value and that value can decrease and that value can increase.
[Guest]: Just like how a game works.
[Guest]: So this is part of my hesitations around the system also.
[Guest]: So just like how a game works, that thing, that armor that you bought or that sword you
[Guest]: bought has value in that game.
[Guest]: Within that game, there is a scarcity of that item.
[Guest]: So you have you are able to technologically impose the scarcity of that item.
[Guest]: Similarly, on that blockchain, that NFT is unique.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but within the game, there is a utility of that item to exactly right.
[Guest]: So there is a limited utility and there is a limited application.
[Guest]: Within that, there is some real value.
[Guest]: It is not universal.
[Guest]: You cannot take it out of context.
[Amit Varma]: You cannot take it.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, besides bragging rights, what value would an NFT have?
[Guest]: It is entirely up to you as the creator.
[Guest]: You can give it various types.
[Guest]: You can decide that, guys, I am sticking to this blockchain and I am putting all my art
[Guest]: on this or my writings on this blockchain.
[Guest]: And I, because you also want your NFTs to have value, right?
[Guest]: Because you want people to buy it with the idea that it's going to be something so that
[Guest]: you get something like the more value it has, the better it is for you.
[Guest]: Because every time somebody.
[Guest]: So one key aspect of NFT contracts is also that if somebody sells it forward, you get
[Guest]: another cut.
[Guest]: Oh, you get to put up to a 10% cut.
[Guest]: So most of the value that artists are making on NFT sales are resale values that they are
[Guest]: getting because they sold something like 10 pieces and then they became famous.
[Guest]: So then the value of those 10 pieces went up huge and then somebody resold it.
[Guest]: And then they got like a very bigger, that 10% turned out to be bigger than what they'd
[Guest]: gotten before.
[Guest]: So that's how a lot of people are making value out of it.
[Guest]: So there is, it is all perception.
[Guest]: You're absolutely right.
[Guest]: But it like a sense of collective delusion that we are all signing up to within a limited
[Guest]: context, collective delusions have value.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, collective, I mean, the currency is just a very dismissive way of me to say
[Amit Varma]: this.
[Amit Varma]: No, no.
[Amit Varma]: I get that.
[Amit Varma]: You don't mean it in a pejorative way.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, a currency is also a collective delusion in terms of a story we've sold ourselves
[Amit Varma]: or even a nation is a collective delusion in one manner of speaking.
[Amit Varma]: So I completely get that.
[Amit Varma]: But obviously, when you encounter something completely new, your initial instinct is distrust
[Amit Varma]: and like, what the hell is this?
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to fall for that.
[Amit Varma]: I remember this old video in the 1990s, where Bill Gates is on the David Letterman show
[Amit Varma]: and David Letterman is saying, what the hell is this internet?
[Amit Varma]: And Gates is trying to explain.
[Amit Varma]: And David Letterman is, hey, if I want to find out the baseball score, have you heard
[Amit Varma]: of a thing called the radio?
[Amit Varma]: I'll turn that on and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So whatever Gates says about the internet, Letterman has repost and of course, we know
[Amit Varma]: what the internet became.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't want to make that kind of a mistake.
[Amit Varma]: Why are you excited about it and why are you apprehensive about it?
[Guest]: So part of the things that make me apprehensive are the early behaviors of a lot of people
[Guest]: around it.
[Guest]: And we were discussing this, that any revolutionary new activity comes with the people who just
[Guest]: want to grab a lot of cash out of it.
[Guest]: So maritime trade, for example, started with piracy.
[Guest]: But that doesn't mean maritime trade is evil and we should not invest in it or we should
[Guest]: not care about it or we should not do maritime trade or if you are a trader of goods.
[Guest]: It is essential, but it started with piracy.
[Guest]: So you can't allow those early adopters to define things.
[Guest]: That is my answer to this apprehension also, that they don't get to define it.
[Guest]: Maybe it can be redefined.
[Guest]: Maybe they do end up like a part of me.
[Guest]: The moralist part of me is that why should I enable them to make money?
[Guest]: Because the more, if I use Ethereum, Ethereum gains value also as my contribution to it.
[Guest]: Any trading in this currency gives value to the currency and these people who are sitting
[Guest]: on it will use it for nefarious things, which is being done like a lot of cryptocurrency
[Guest]: is used for terrible crimes and criminal activities because it's undocumented.
[Guest]: But then, but then all money is, all money is, all money is, but it has never been this
[Guest]: easy for someone to hold 4000 and for it to become 50,000 the next day.
[Guest]: And today it is like Elon Musk needs to tweet once and that 50,000 becomes 1 million tomorrow.
[Guest]: And then it can be used.
[Guest]: And then day after tomorrow, that 1 million can be brought down to 30,000 again.
[Guest]: So this kind of quick manipulation and globally impacting instantaneous quick manipulation
[Guest]: is unprecedented.
[Guest]: It just makes me feel a little iffy about the way things like for a decentralized currency
[Guest]: to be so dependent, so affected by the tweet of a crazy person is just ridiculous to me
[Guest]: that he can affect it 30, 40% in value.
[Guest]: What kind of insider trading must he be doing?
[Guest]: And what does that do?
[Guest]: So suppose I own, I have large Ethereum holdings and I have large Bitcoin holdings and Dogecoin
[Guest]: holdings and Elon Musk is big on all of these things.
[Guest]: In a sense, I'm beholden to Elon Musk, his reputation.
[Guest]: If Elon Musk goes to jail, all of these things plummet.
[Guest]: Do I not want Elon Musk to go to jail for crimes then after if suppose he commits a
[Guest]: horrible crime in the future, anybody, any billionaire commits a terrible crime in the
[Guest]: future, their holdings of a certain cryptocurrency can have impact on my life savings.
[Guest]: So am I now their vassal in a sense that I don't want my overlord to be touched?
[Guest]: It makes me think that there is this techno feudalism that we are entering into with this
[Guest]: cryptocurrencies that we were beholden say until now with national currencies, you have
[Guest]: beholden to a nation state, right?
[Guest]: If that nation collapses, then that currency also collapses.
[Guest]: But now cryptocurrencies are going to be managed by companies and venture capitalists.
[Guest]: And they say decentralized, but I don't quite buy it.
[Guest]: Because well, at least in this initial stage, my apprehension is that that's a cover.
[Guest]: And the billionaires and the rogue capitalists and whatever these you know, like, I do doesn't
[Guest]: make me doesn't make me their vassal.
[Guest]: Am I now beholden to them and that thought is very deeply unsettling to me.
[Guest]: One part of me doesn't want to invest in it.
[Guest]: The other part of me is like, I don't want anything to do with you.
[Guest]: I'm not going to help you.
[Guest]: I don't need to make money off of you.
[Guest]: I'll do my own thing.
[Guest]: Like you said, with Patreon and other avenues, I'll buy Why can't I do it that way?
[Guest]: Why do I need to do NFTs?
[Guest]: So a large part of my excitement with NFTs is that not necessarily that I have to do
[Guest]: NFTs, but that they are opening up people's minds to other forms of engagement and other
[Guest]: forms of value creation.
[Guest]: So the idea that value can be created by forming a community around a certain artist or an
[Guest]: artwork, and that then it is expected that these communities will have these kind of
[Guest]: exclusive events that sends a base value once people internalize that this sort of thing
[Guest]: is supposed to be worth $100 a month, why not?
[Guest]: Then they are open to paying you that money.
[Guest]: Like as soon as people understood that, oh, $5 a month is something that is done to support
[Guest]: an artist.
[Guest]: Now I'm able to charge that money $5 a month and many, many people are paying me that and
[Guest]: helping me thrive.
[Guest]: So I have so many ideas around the ways I want to create value around my art.
[Guest]: They are not bound to NFTs.
[Guest]: In my case, but NFTs being the hot thing that they are mean that many, many more people
[Guest]: are likely to jump into it if I if it is offered as an NFT, then if the same thing is offered
[Guest]: in another platform.
[Guest]: So then again, that tantalizes me that why don't I enter it because FOMO this this thing
[Guest]: is important to me like I love playing games.
[Guest]: All of my life life is just a bunch of different games and how we play these games and what
[Guest]: games we play and what are the rules we formulate and what are the reward mechanisms.
[Guest]: This is fun.
[Guest]: This is what this is what the great kick of being an entrepreneur is you get to play games
[Guest]: and you get to play what I call infinite games.
[Guest]: So finite games are the ones that have an end.
[Guest]: And so I used to play a lot of sports like I used to play badminton when I was in school.
[Guest]: I played badminton for my college also.
[Guest]: And I have also been a computer gamer.
[Guest]: And I noticed this thing in all of these things that I'm very competitive, and I love being
[Guest]: good at things.
[Guest]: So I was very good at badminton and squash and things.
[Guest]: But I don't care if I lose or win.
[Amit Varma]: Like, it doesn't hurt me.
[Guest]: The process is a point not the result, I play infinite games, like I enjoyed the fact that
[Guest]: I played for two hours today.
[Guest]: Maybe I lost five games, I won three games, but I had a hell of a two hours.
[Guest]: That's what's fun to me.
[Guest]: So the process of playing is the joy and the win is nice.
[Guest]: It's great.
[Guest]: Oh, I won, I beat this person.
[Guest]: But then next time I feel like I need to do even better this person I can win against.
[Guest]: So maybe it's almost not so good if I win like losing is a more useful trait than winning.
[Guest]: Because it keeps you focused and enjoying and learning, learning and doing appreciating
[Guest]: and you know, getting into it with more vigor next time.
[Guest]: And so these infinite games are interesting to me.
[Guest]: And as an artist, I play infinite games.
[Guest]: I'm in the business of playing infinite games.
[Guest]: I'm figuring out my not Patreon, but my buy me a coffee, my sub stack members, I call
[Guest]: them sneaky art insiders, because I play infinite games with them.
[Guest]: It sounds so manipulative.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, if they're listening to this, they'll be like he's toying with us.
[Guest]: So the games are things like I share content with them that I have not put out outside.
[Guest]: So right now my podcast is just conversations I have with other artists.
[Guest]: But now I'm doing some more impromptu self conversations with myself.
[Guest]: I am reading out stories that I'm creating around my art.
[Guest]: I am doing what I call post script conversations.
[Guest]: So once these list of questions and ideas run out, the guest and I just sort of lean
[Guest]: back and we're like, Oh, okay, how was that?
[Guest]: How did that go?
[Guest]: You know, there's this very long goodbye, like, okay, let's talk later.
[Guest]: But there's one more thing and then you end up talking for a half hour, 45 minutes more.
[Guest]: So I call this a post script.
[Guest]: And I record this also now and if it's nice, I share this with so my insiders are my focus
[Guest]: group with whom I played what I call these games is that I share my vulnerable media.
[Guest]: I'm not so sure how it is.
[Guest]: Please tell me.
[Guest]: I am not so confident in doing these things.
[Guest]: Please tell me what you think like me talking just into a mic and telling you a story is
[Guest]: not something I'm kicked about sharing with my general podcast audience yet.
[Guest]: But with you, I will because you are my true fans.
[Guest]: You really care about my work and what I'm another thing I'm doing right now, which has
[Guest]: been really fun and very gratifying and coming to the point of what you said about blogging
[Guest]: with an audience.
[Guest]: So this is a small audience, my insiders, not my broad audience, but I am writing my
[Guest]: book with them.
[Guest]: I share passages of my next book, which is going to be sneaky out of Vancouver, and I'm
[Guest]: going to self publish it, but I'm writing it and I every month I share a new passage
[Guest]: with them.
[Guest]: And what this does is it puts me on a monthly schedule every month, I have to have a substantial
[Guest]: amount written, it has to be about my art, it has to be about Vancouver.
[Guest]: So I'm incentivized this month to explore Vancouver in some new way, which could add
[Guest]: to that book.
[Guest]: And I'm sharing it with this audience that is paying me to read it.
[Guest]: They are my insiders, they care about my work.
[Guest]: So they give me excellent feedback.
[Guest]: They tell me what they like, they tell me what they didn't like, they I'm open to all
[Guest]: kinds of criticism from them, because I know that they're coming from a they're vested
[Guest]: in me.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Same similarly about like, you could imagine, oh, if you have people who own your NFTs,
[Guest]: you know that these people really they are completely vested in you because financially
[Guest]: they were like NFTs will rise in financial value, the better you do.
[Guest]: So they are deeply incentivized to ensure your success.
[Guest]: You are almost recruiting a team to do PR for you also, because they are deeply incentivized
[Guest]: to always talk about your work, because they own a part of your work, and that will go
[Guest]: up in value, just like a patron of old, like if they have a painting of yours, it helps
[Guest]: them if you sell paintings to other people also, because then their painting also goes
[Guest]: up in value, or you sell painting somewhere else.
[Guest]: So similarly, with my insiders, I'm playing these little games, which I'm enjoying a lot.
[Guest]: And they give me feedback, it's useful feedback.
[Guest]: And it makes me a better writer for my general podcast for my general newsletter, it makes
[Guest]: me a better thinker, it forces me it incentivizes me to put my thoughts in order.
[Amit Varma]: And in a year's or six months time, it will lead to a finished book that will be published.
[Amit Varma]: That's fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I've you know, I've almost by happenstance without thinking too deeply about this stuff
[Amit Varma]: been kind of successful at building different kinds of communities.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there's a clear writing community, obviously, you know, more than 1500 people
[Amit Varma]: have done the course more than 800 people within that community.
[Amit Varma]: So got to kind of revitalize that and do more things.
[Amit Varma]: Plus, there's of course, a few 1000 people who follow my newsletter, even though I've
[Amit Varma]: posted a handful of times.
[Amit Varma]: So I really need to get regular.
[Amit Varma]: And if you are listening to this, and you're a fan, you know, if I start a Patreon club,
[Amit Varma]: do let me know what you'd like to see there, you know, maybe inside interactions on each
[Amit Varma]: episode, maybe sharing my research and work process, whatever it is, let me know what
[Amit Varma]: you'd kind of like there.
[Amit Varma]: All this is, you know, fun to think about now you mentioned your writing.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a bit about your writing because all this happened because you wanted to be
[Amit Varma]: a writer.
[Amit Varma]: And somehow you then became an artist and a salesman and a creator in the creator economy
[Amit Varma]: and all of these things.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit more about the writing.
[Amit Varma]: Is that something that still drives you something you want to do?
[Guest]: And what kind of book are you writing?
[Guest]: When I left my PhD program, I was going to write this book about a person who accidentally
[Guest]: goes back in time and realizes that going back in time is not such a romantic notion
[Guest]: after all.
[Guest]: No air conditioning.
[Amit Varma]: No air conditioning.
[Amit Varma]: He doesn't go that far.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: He goes from back in his own life.
[Amit Varma]: No internet.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no internet.
[Guest]: No internet is true in the story.
[Guest]: So there are consequences to unlicensed time travel.
[Guest]: That was the idea of the book.
[Guest]: That book has gone through five drafts since I left my PhD program, not full drafts even
[Guest]: 60% 50% 40% 40% 30% entire rewrites though, right from the start again, every time the
[Guest]: story has changed, it started as a first person narrative, it changed to an outside narrative,
[Guest]: the characters have changed, the premise has changed, the ending has changed.
[Guest]: My idea for it, the scope of it has changed.
[Guest]: And I just find that it's very difficult, this process of writing a novel is very unrewarding
[Guest]: because how it works is that you write the whole thing.
[Guest]: And then you go to somebody and they tell you if they like it enough in that zeitgeist
[Guest]: of that moment, whether it's worth publishing for them.
[Guest]: And you have to take a rejection from a bunch of people after finishing the whole damn thing,
[Guest]: which is so difficult.
[Guest]: And then maybe two years later, it gets out.
[Guest]: And then maybe you do all the work around it and people are ready for it at that time
[Guest]: and it sells.
[Guest]: So much work goes into this thing.
[Guest]: And it is dependent on so much luck and circumstance like it is bound to so many failures that
[Guest]: have nothing to do with your ability or your the value of your work that I just hate this
[Guest]: system.
[Guest]: So my current plan is and I don't get this with my other creative output, right?
[Guest]: So my podcast I hear every week from people, people tell me on buy me a coffee, they buy
[Guest]: me coffee, they tell me how they like it, my guests are there, I get to learn, have
[Guest]: a discord around my art and my podcast.
[Guest]: So I get to hear every week from people how that's going, we talk on that and we interact.
[Guest]: My newsletter has an audience of true fans also, and then they get it every week and
[Guest]: thousands of readers who tell me what they think what they like.
[Guest]: So I get this feedback, I don't run on this feedback.
[Guest]: And like to your point before, we need to be self motivated.
[Guest]: I'm very, very insistent on that, that the fuel has to be me.
[Guest]: It cannot be relied upon on other people.
[Guest]: But this helps, it helps you to think that you're not screaming into the void, which
[Guest]: is what Facebook in 2014 felt like just screaming into the void, and nothing is coming back.
[Guest]: So my plan for now is that I want to continue to do this, just like the way I decided that
[Guest]: I'm going to accept the title of artist, because that meant that I'm not a writer first.
[Guest]: And I did that because what is my USP in this new country, that I was living in Wisconsin,
[Guest]: my USP is that I'm making this art that nobody has seen this kind of art.
[Guest]: Art is easy to appreciate, it needs 10 seconds of time, at most, and people are hooked, writing
[Guest]: needs way more time before somebody is hooked, hooked, and you need to do a it's a far more
[Guest]: difficult job.
[Guest]: So it gets me a broader audience, and once you have an audience, you can do many things
[Guest]: with that audience.
[Guest]: I do not like the traditional novel publishing route.
[Guest]: I don't like the system where I have to beg and plead for attention.
[Guest]: And after I have done my job, I have to now finish the job.
[Guest]: Now I have to desperately seek rewards for it, and validation for it before those rewards.
[Guest]: How I want to do it is that I want to use my platform as a sneaky artist, while continuously
[Guest]: writing fiction, nonfiction, everything, and develop my name, develop my brand, be somebody
[Guest]: who is in a more commanding position with their work to get that attention.
[Guest]: I don't want to have to beg for attention for my finished novel.
[Guest]: I want there to be a group of people who will care for it already, who are waiting to read
[Guest]: it, who will be willing to be beta readers of it.
[Guest]: That's the conditions under which I want to put in that much single sided effort.
[Guest]: Because I know that the novel is not something that I want to share chapter by chapter and
[Guest]: get feedback.
[Guest]: I want to finish the whole thing.
[Guest]: Doing that means disengaging from a lot of other work.
[Guest]: I can't just also be doing it on the side.
[Guest]: I will have to take time to do only that.
[Guest]: And that means killing a lot of other momentum.
[Guest]: And I am not in a position that I want to kill that momentum just yet.
[Guest]: I want to keep this dream alive that my fiction novel will get published and I will be a writer.
[Guest]: Maybe it turns out to be unnecessary by the end.
[Guest]: And I don't end up doing it.
[Guest]: But this process right now of the reward mechanism and the way the art works, I make a drawing,
[Guest]: I post it and I get dopamine.
[Guest]: I like it.
[Guest]: My natural inclination is towards it.
[Guest]: I used to draw a lot of comics and I drew some long form comics also.
[Guest]: And it was a very excruciating process for me.
[Guest]: And I love it.
[Guest]: And I want to do more of those things.
[Guest]: I have come to understand that that is not who I am naturally.
[Guest]: I am the kind of person who wants to do things once and get something for it.
[Guest]: For good and for bad.
[Guest]: And art, the way I draw, lends itself to that more easily.
[Guest]: It has a lot of value to a lot of people.
[Guest]: And by being a writer around it, I can create more and more value around it.
[Guest]: Like I was saying, my hope is that this lets me be a writer later with a little more ease.
[Guest]: And my hope is that once I taste this success, that I will be a little more amenable to rewriting,
[Guest]: redrafting, and the long form work of putting together a novel.
[Amit Varma]: You know, increasingly, I'm like this whole sort of circle that you mentioned that you
[Amit Varma]: finish the book, you go to a publisher gets published two years later.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, when I look back at episodes that I read a year ago, I can't bear to hear
[Amit Varma]: them today.
[Amit Varma]: At the time, I might have liked them, and I refer them to someone and say, hey, I like
[Amit Varma]: doing this.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm not going to go back and actually listen to it.
[Amit Varma]: It's in my past.
[Amit Varma]: Like, honestly, Nishant, by the time this episode is out, it's out of my system, right?
[Amit Varma]: You know, I'm on to new episodes.
[Amit Varma]: That's the whole game for me.
[Amit Varma]: And the other part of it is that what we've seen in all media is that intermediaries are
[Amit Varma]: falling apart.
[Amit Varma]: We don't need them anymore.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: Our creators are reaching their audiences directly monetizing that directly.
[Amit Varma]: Now at one level, the notion of the book as 100,000 word 150,000 word thing that you publish
[Amit Varma]: in that particular packaging is I think the artifact of an earlier era.
[Amit Varma]: That's number one, that writing doesn't have to be, you know, writing can be shorter or
[Amit Varma]: longer or structured differently or sold differently, packaged differently.
[Amit Varma]: But also publishing houses, I think are largely dinosaurs, they're like the gatekeepers of
[Amit Varma]: old, they're just like the art galleries that we kind of discussed, you know, often following
[Amit Varma]: fashions of the times and being restricted by the tastes of the people who kind of happened
[Amit Varma]: to be there, which, you know, might close out many groups of people, especially less
[Amit Varma]: privileged groups of people, for example, who just might not have that entry point to
[Amit Varma]: begin with and less privileged in different ways.
[Amit Varma]: So you've experimented with self publishing as well.
[Amit Varma]: So what was that experience like?
[Amit Varma]: Because when I was growing up in India, no doubt when you were growing up in India as
[Amit Varma]: well, which is possibly a decade after me, self publishing was considered, you know,
[Amit Varma]: people look down on it, like you couldn't find a publisher to TK, Calcutta had a famous
[Amit Varma]: self publisher writers workshop run by P Lal.
[Amit Varma]: So the whole gig was that, oh, you couldn't find a publisher to self publish, you know,
[Guest]: so yeah, so there is this, again, there was this hierarchy, right?
[Guest]: Because while there were institutions, the point of institutions is that they have perceived
[Guest]: value.
[Guest]: There is this esteem and this prestige that comes with being associated with say, Penguin
[Guest]: or Harper Collins or whatever names there are.
[Guest]: But that is falling apart in this new world.
[Guest]: Increasingly, people, in fact, cherish the independent creator.
[Guest]: They understand this idea of the privilege associated with having a publisher has reached
[Guest]: a lot more people.
[Guest]: This idea that it's not all merit, it's a lot of circumstance and it's a lot of privilege.
[Guest]: It's about networks and contacts.
[Guest]: Very often doesn't mean that published people are not good, but very often this is a factor
[Guest]: of these other things also.
[Guest]: And therefore, someone being independent is not inferior to a published person.
[Guest]: This is the crux of what has been absorbed.
[Guest]: And in fact, perhaps we need to value these underdogs who are putting out content.
[Guest]: Thanks to YouTube.
[Guest]: Thanks to Twitch.
[Guest]: Thanks to Twitter.
[Guest]: Thanks to TikTok.
[Guest]: Also, these independent people have created a market for independent content.
[Guest]: This is something that I really enjoyed.
[Guest]: I really admired because I have always felt like an outsider.
[Guest]: I didn't study English in like my bachelor's.
[Guest]: So I did not spend time around people who were writing all the time.
[Guest]: I didn't spend time around people who could tell me about the craft of writing.
[Guest]: I'd therefore later, these people would end up joining publishing houses as editors or
[Guest]: as readers or as publishers or whatever various capacities of that hierarchy.
[Guest]: I don't know these people.
[Guest]: So therefore I have none of those contacts.
[Guest]: I'm not an artist also trained.
[Guest]: So I have no contacts in any geographical region with curators or gallery owners, etc.
[Guest]: So I'm an outsider in all of these worlds.
[Guest]: And the only way things have worked for me is with the latest technology of the time.
[Guest]: The social media worked for me at the time.
[Guest]: And now the creator economy, media, and the services associated around that are working
[Guest]: for me.
[Guest]: So after I sold art, the first season of selling art in Wisconsin in 2018, I thought at the
[Guest]: end of that season, what I'm going to do next year, because I was thinking that suppose
[Guest]: someone has put my art on the wall, how much more are they going to buy?
[Guest]: Even if they really like me, how much like how much wall space will someone give me man,
[Guest]: limited hair, why shouldn't they patronize other artists and like, I'll run out of repeat
[Guest]: customers.
[Guest]: So now I need to occupy a different part of their home.
[Guest]: Literally, this was the thought, a book can occupy a different part of their home.
[Guest]: Book is a nice gift book is a nice thing to keep.
[Guest]: Why don't I make a coffee table book.
[Guest]: And I just thought I'll make it because there was no way that I could I couldn't even imagine
[Guest]: getting someone interested in it.
[Guest]: But this is what I did to really understand the process.
[Guest]: I went to this writer's workshop in Chicago.
[Guest]: And this was not a workshop to teach you to write.
[Guest]: But this was a workshop about pitching to literary agents.
[Guest]: And America has a very thriving independent publishing industry as well as the traditional
[Guest]: and many different scales of it.
[Guest]: So there are small publishers that are larger medium and larger publishers also.
[Guest]: So all of these processes are therefore very formalized, and it's very good to be a new
[Guest]: person getting into them.
[Guest]: So I got a 20 minute session, or maybe it was a 10 minute session with a literary agent.
[Guest]: And she just loved what I told her she loved my pitch.
[Guest]: She loved my idea.
[Guest]: And I took some samples of how my book might look like I printed out 10 pages and I showed
[Guest]: this is what I want my art book to look like and she just loved it.
[Guest]: So she was an instant fan.
[Guest]: Like she said it in so many words that you've absolutely got me like I'm in but I don't
[Guest]: think this should be traditionally published.
[Guest]: That's what she said.
[Guest]: And this was around the incentives of traditional publishing.
[Guest]: And I think every writer like we are talking about whether you want to write a book or
[Guest]: not every writer should also think about what is the reward of traditional publishing to
[Guest]: them and then to the publisher.
[Guest]: So a publisher will publish if they can see a financial reward which comes from 1000s
[Guest]: of copies.
[Guest]: It doesn't come from 100s of copies.
[Guest]: It depends on like the large costs associated with their work, then they have to time it
[Guest]: so that they can promote it.
[Guest]: So it has to fit into their calendar, which has involves other authors and other things
[Guest]: and things that they might perceive are competing with your book.
[Guest]: So do they want to promote two things that might eat into each other.
[Guest]: So now suddenly you are locked into a competition with someone that you don't intend you don't
[Guest]: even know, but simply out of virtue of being associated with a publisher you are.
[Guest]: So my circumstance in Wisconsin was that I want to make a book about this town in Wisconsin.
[Guest]: The population is only 80,000.
[Guest]: My largest market is 100,000 potential and 100,000 market doesn't mean 100,000 people
[Guest]: will buy the book.
[Guest]: 10% of this market will buy the book if I am lucky.
[Guest]: So most likely I have 100s of copies to sell.
[Guest]: Who cares which publisher will care about that?
[Guest]: No publisher will care.
[Guest]: But this doesn't mean that there are no rewards in it for me.
[Guest]: The act of putting together a book is a fantastic learning exercise.
[Guest]: That's a reward for me.
[Guest]: The cost of self publishing and then the profit of selling all of those books.
[Guest]: There is a financial reward for me.
[Guest]: There is a reputational reward in having a book.
[Guest]: It's something that I bring along to various people.
[Guest]: Like when I give podcast conversations, I carry the book and I give it to podcast hosts
[Guest]: before and then they look at it and they feel nice and then I feel nice and then they keep
[Guest]: it and it occupies a space on their shelf.
[Guest]: That is a reward for me.
[Guest]: That is a non-monetary, but it is a very significant reward if I occupy that space in someone's
[Amit Varma]: life.
[Amit Varma]: I guess book owned by Amit Verma could be in the category of the Twitter accounts that
[Amit Varma]: are followed by the Prime Minister.
[Amit Varma]: Well, maybe not.
[Guest]: Carry on.
[Guest]: So she asked me to formulate a nonfiction book proposal and a nonfiction book proposal
[Guest]: has these various criteria that you fulfill.
[Guest]: Firstly you have to, so a fiction book proposal needs a full book, full book manuscript.
[Guest]: But a nonfiction book proposal does not need that.
[Guest]: It needs two chapters and an introduction and a table of contents.
[Guest]: So my book doesn't have chapters because it's all art.
[Guest]: So I just thought, okay, 20 pages and a table of contents or whatever, whatever the format
[Guest]: is as I imagine.
[Guest]: And I'll write the intro.
[Guest]: So that I needed to do.
[Guest]: And I needed to think of it as what the final product is going to be.
[Guest]: Then another aspect of this is of preparing a book, a nonfiction book proposal is that
[Guest]: you have to talk about your audience, who is your target audience?
[Guest]: Not only that, oh, everybody who loves art, no, geographically, age wise, socially, various
[Guest]: interests, numbers, use numbers.
[Guest]: My audience is the kind of people who buy this kind of book, which sold 5 million copies.
[Guest]: My audience is people ages 30 to blah, blah, blah, living in this part of the world.
[Guest]: The population census number is this.
[Guest]: So this is a, again, a dispassionate way to look at your work.
[Guest]: It asks you to do this.
[Guest]: Secondly, pitching like this means that suddenly you start to see who does it have value for?
[Guest]: Why is this not my audience?
[Guest]: Why is this my audience?
[Guest]: What can it be?
[Guest]: What can I do so that this is also my audience?
[Guest]: Suddenly you're thinking not of changing your art, not of changing your craft, but of how
[Guest]: you talk about it.
[Guest]: How do I get these other people to be interested?
[Guest]: So Eau Claire has a university.
[Guest]: So there are parents of students.
[Guest]: Why shouldn't the parents who live maybe in other states or other towns, why shouldn't
[Guest]: they also, they should also care about this book.
[Guest]: How can I make my book so that even they are part of my target demographic?
[Guest]: Another part I had to write was your competence.
[Guest]: Why are you the right person to write this book?
[Guest]: Traditionally nonfiction would be say politics, economics.
[Guest]: So you would have to cite your degrees or your experience to say that I have, I'm an
[Guest]: authority on the subject.
[Guest]: In this case, it was an art book.
[Guest]: So I only had to say, I'm an artist.
[Guest]: This book is from the perspective of somebody who has spent two years in this town and is
[Guest]: not from this town.
[Guest]: So I am the only person who can write this book effectively, because now I have changed
[Guest]: what this book is also about to suit why I am the only person to write this book.
[Guest]: Again, this slightly shifted.
[Guest]: What does this book mean?
[Guest]: How am I going to later talk about this book to people?
[Guest]: How am I going to present this book to people in the introduction?
[Guest]: That also shifted slightly because I had to figure out why I am the most appropriate person
[Guest]: to write a book of art about Eau Claire.
[Guest]: No, this is because it is a book of sneaky art about Eau Claire from somebody who is
[Guest]: not of this town and is trying to understand this town.
[Guest]: Therefore, the only person who can write it is somebody who is not from this town and
[Guest]: who makes art like me, sneaky.
[Guest]: So I sort of created these circumstances around it.
[Guest]: And then there are a couple of other things you're supposed to write in a non-fiction.
[Guest]: It's a roughly a 20 page proposal, but I filled out the whole thing.
[Guest]: Didn't send it to anybody because by the time I wrote it, I concluded that self-publishing
[Guest]: is what I need to do because there's nobody who's going to care.
[Guest]: Like what did I say?
[Guest]: 500 people will buy this book.
[Guest]: I can't even see.
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: There are three bookstores here.
[Guest]: What thousand people will these numbers don't matter to them.
[Guest]: So they will not be interested, but that this book needs to exist because I want to occupy
[Guest]: a new part of people's home and I want to create something and I want to see what it
[Guest]: is like to do it.
[Guest]: And all of these processes are amazing learning experiences around making a book.
[Guest]: So I went to a independent press in the neighboring city in Minneapolis and I, they do independent
[Guest]: book books.
[Guest]: So what they do is that they have a formalized process of how to put this together.
[Guest]: There are a bunch of six, seven meetings on different topics, but they get you in touch
[Guest]: with a designer who might be skilled at the genre you are aiming at.
[Guest]: And then there are associated fees for these various meetings, for this various things
[Guest]: that they will do for you, like getting you an ISBN listing, et cetera, et cetera.
[Guest]: The designers fees, the feedback and all the various interchange and meetings you'll have.
[Guest]: So finally printing, deciding on what quality of pages you want, deciding on what size you
[Guest]: want the book.
[Guest]: Should it have a hard cover?
[Guest]: Should it have a jacket?
[Guest]: I made all of these calls myself.
[Guest]: I want my book to be a square book.
[Guest]: I don't want it to be long or tall.
[Guest]: I wanted to have a hard cover with a dust jacket and I wanted to lay flat so that if
[Guest]: I have these spreads, two page spread drawings, I want them, someone to be able to put it
[Guest]: flat on their coffee table and see it without having to hold it.
[Guest]: And I want to have that.
[Guest]: So I was thinking about user experience around the book.
[Guest]: How will they regard a book of art?
[Guest]: How will they keep it in their house?
[Guest]: If it can lay flat, it can be left flat.
[Guest]: Maybe they leave it as an open page.
[Guest]: That might be interesting.
[Guest]: It's an art display.
[Guest]: They can flip the page every day.
[Guest]: So this thing stuck in my head.
[Guest]: When I would later sell the book, I would tell people this, that look, this book lays
[Guest]: flat.
[Guest]: Every day you can turn the page and then 100 days you will have 100 pieces of art to look
[Guest]: at because it's 112 odd pages.
[Guest]: This again became a way for me to sell this book.
[Guest]: Again it became a way for me to create value around this book.
[Guest]: It became a way for me to see value around my art and my book and my work.
[Amit Varma]: And what was the process?
[Amit Varma]: Like where did you sell it?
[Amit Varma]: How many copies did you sell?
[Amit Varma]: Was it profitable?
[Amit Varma]: And most importantly, can this model scale, like I understand for one person doing an
[Amit Varma]: art book in a particular location, you can make it work for you.
[Amit Varma]: But what are your thoughts on self publishing in general, like how far along has print on
[Amit Varma]: demand come?
[Amit Varma]: I keep telling young writers who want to write articles for Indian Express or Times of India
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, that don't do that because for a number of reasons.
[Amit Varma]: One is that you will not be writing enough because the gatekeepers won't approve you
[Amit Varma]: enough and you need to write a lot to be good.
[Amit Varma]: Two, your pieces will all be dispersed.
[Amit Varma]: So if you want to build a community of your fans, you can't do that.
[Amit Varma]: Someone will read your piece in TOI and will say, oh, what a good writer and but then,
[Amit Varma]: you know, whereas if you just write in a newsletter, if they like what you do, they can subscribe
[Amit Varma]: to you, you build a community of your fans, your work isn't dispersed, it's in one place.
[Amit Varma]: But that's what those kind of writers, whereas, you know, are there possibilities where is
[Amit Varma]: print on demand advanced enough that people can, can someone write a bestseller today,
[Amit Varma]: an actual bestseller, bestseller, without going through a publisher, just using Amazon's
[Guest]: print on demand, for example.
[Guest]: So for example, how I did this was that I printed 500 copies, we reached a number for
[Guest]: that it was roughly $10,000 at that time for me.
[Guest]: So roughly $20 per book, I decided to sell it at $30 because I wanted to put at the lowest
[Guest]: price point that this town is not rich, that they'll buy it, but I'll make some profit.
[Guest]: I broke even very quickly, not only the book, but when I started selling the book, the associated
[Guest]: prints and things like that, within two months, I broke even with my 10,000, I made a lot
[Guest]: of money very quickly, I did the job of distributing it myself also.
[Guest]: So the marketing job, once you have the book, however, you there are lots of advisories
[Guest]: on this, by the way, you can then so many resources, beautiful resources, reach out
[Guest]: to local bookstores, local gift shops, tell them you're going to do a book launch, they
[Guest]: will give you the space and the blah, blah, blah, and they will take a cut of the book.
[Guest]: And you can call your fans there.
[Guest]: I had people drive two and a half hours to come to buy the book from me.
[Guest]: It was just it was unreal when that's when this person said to me that I drove 200 miles
[Guest]: just for this just to buy the book from someone you didn't know before I had no idea.
[Guest]: They came from 200 miles away.
[Guest]: Because what I was offering was and again, I offered people that anybody who buys a book
[Guest]: from me in person, I will draw a portrait of you right there and then in the first page
[Guest]: of the book.
[Guest]: This is my thank you to you for buying from me.
[Guest]: The Marwari artist.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's it's art.
[Guest]: Art should not be like, oh, I only draw when I'm I don't believe all that stuff.
[Guest]: And look at the self improvement aspect.
[Amit Varma]: The more I draw people, the better I get.
[Amit Varma]: It's a good exercise.
[Amit Varma]: Fantastic.
[Guest]: I want to get better at drawing portraits.
[Guest]: Hey, let's draw portraits.
[Guest]: Stand for me.
[Guest]: Let's talk.
[Guest]: And I'm talking to them for five minutes while I draw right.
[Guest]: They're not silent.
[Guest]: This is engagement.
[Guest]: This creates deep.
[Guest]: These people would become repeat customers by every commission me for art afterwards
[Guest]: that I love this drawing you made of me in the book, I want you to draw a family portrait
[Guest]: for me that I will send out as a Christmas card or whatever.
[Guest]: So this is how I formed a bond with them.
[Guest]: I had real conversations with them.
[Guest]: Tell me about your life.
[Guest]: What brought you down here?
[Guest]: How are you doing today?
[Guest]: Like what?
[Guest]: What?
[Guest]: Which cheese are you going to buy next door?
[Guest]: Things like this.
[Guest]: So the experience around this doing a launch event, being an introvert and doing a launch
[Guest]: event.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: Super difficult.
[Guest]: But you need to do this, right?
[Guest]: You need to push out of these.
[Guest]: You can't be locked inside your comfort zones.
[Guest]: I have held this idea with me for a very long time that, you know, everything good is outside
[Guest]: my comfort zone.
[Guest]: My comfort zone is my coffin in a sense, like I'm just comfortable here.
[Guest]: But this is not the place for me to exist.
[Guest]: Even if just a little outside, I have to be outside it.
[Amit Varma]: Who's comfortable in a coffin?
[Amit Varma]: But I get your point.
[Amit Varma]: No, it is not comfortable in a coffin.
[Amit Varma]: I get your point.
[Amit Varma]: You're making separate points.
[Guest]: It is my comfort zone and it is the death of me.
[Guest]: It is the death of me.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: This is where everything finishes if I stay there.
[Guest]: So doing these things gave me so much confidence.
[Guest]: Like I know that in Bombay, in Delhi, in Calcutta, in Eau Claire, Wisconsin, in Chicago, USA,
[Guest]: in Vancouver, Canada.
[Guest]: I can do an event anywhere and I can get a hundred people to come to look at me, to talk
[Guest]: to me, to listen to me, and I can talk to them.
[Guest]: I did that.
[Guest]: I introduced my book.
[Guest]: I did a presentation, PowerPoint slide of the book, and I talked about my book for half
[Guest]: an hour.
[Guest]: I answered questions, all impromptu, because I need to go through this exercise.
[Guest]: I need to go through this tough stuff that I don't know how to do, because then I will
[Guest]: be a superman.
[Guest]: The superman of Malegaon.
[Guest]: It was so good to do this, like so much value.
[Guest]: Monetary value is there.
[Guest]: And this is a monetary value that you will not get as a traditional publisher.
[Guest]: You will get your advance against royalties, but they don't tell you your sales.
[Guest]: They don't tell you, like, you don't find out until you hit a big number that there
[Guest]: are royalties coming to you.
[Guest]: Who knows how much transparency there is?
[Guest]: Who is to ensure there is honesty in this system?
[Guest]: It is just insane.
[Guest]: So what this does in my case is, now it's been two years, right?
[Guest]: Like you mentioned, two months after the podcast release, you will have moved on, right?
[Guest]: I have 100 copies left of my book.
[Guest]: I have purposely not sold them.
[Guest]: Because the more time I keep them, the more they increase.
[Guest]: And today I sell that book of $30 at $50.
[Guest]: Because the value has increased.
[Amit Varma]: My value has increased.
[Guest]: So the last copy you have will be like a couple of million and Elon Musk will buy it.
[Guest]: And you will say, I have never called him a fool.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So I will always hold on to the last 10 books.
[Guest]: For this reason, this is my first book.
[Guest]: It's always going to have more and more and more value.
[Guest]: Today I'm selling according to my worth.
[Guest]: So my worth right now for the book is $50.
[Guest]: Next year, it's going to rise again, inflationary times, unfortunately.
[Guest]: But my point is that I am always incentivized to sell this book.
[Guest]: But outside of this particular example.
[Guest]: So now when we are talking about scaling, and you're talking about other things.
[Guest]: So firstly, I want to put it to you that the idea of scaling again brings us back to the
[Guest]: old idea of a book.
[Guest]: Let it not scale.
[Guest]: You are talking about having value as a writer.
[Guest]: Value as a writer does not exist in the printed form alone.
[Guest]: Let the printed book never scale.
[Guest]: Let it always be 1000 copies.
[Guest]: Let those 1000 copies be like the first edition of Charles Dickens.
[Guest]: Let all the second and third and fourth editions exist digitally, because that's why your audience
[Guest]: is reading.
[Guest]: Why not?
[Amit Varma]: There are now on...
[Amit Varma]: That's actually not true, because people thought Kindle will kill print publishing.
[Amit Varma]: I thought certainly, but that's turned out to be not the case.
[Guest]: No, no, I'm not saying that there is no money in the other thing.
[Guest]: I'm saying that you do not have to subscribe to that model as the only way to make money.
[Guest]: I'm saying that if you don't want to do traditional publishing, it's not that now you can't make
[Guest]: money if you don't scale.
[Guest]: There are many ways to make money without scaling in printed form.
[Amit Varma]: But what if a wannabe Chetan Bhagat comes to you and says, I want to scale, which is
[Amit Varma]: perfectly noble.
[Guest]: There's nothing wrong with it.
[Guest]: So then there are so many people doing it on Amazon, there are so many now more services
[Guest]: coming in also, there are umpteen ways to do it.
[Guest]: And it's working out really well for lots of artists, lots of writers.
[Guest]: Another thing people are doing now is they are they are serializing fiction also.
[Guest]: So Substack is incentivizing this as well.
[Guest]: And a lot of people are.
[Guest]: So the model is that suppose you have 50 people who pay you $5 a month.
[Guest]: So $250 a month for one chapter every month, you will end up making by the end of the book,
[Guest]: you will make more than you would have gotten as an advance.
[Guest]: And now you have printed copies that you print yourself to sell to more people.
[Guest]: Meanwhile, these true fans are your PR, there are lots of you will end up making more money
[Guest]: this way than you would with a standard advance as a first time author.
[Guest]: And then all sales are your sales.
[Guest]: Like the biggest point to me is that once you lose track of these numbers, you don't
[Guest]: want why would I go to a launch event when I'll never see royalties, like kap dega, kitna
[Guest]: dega, 10 dollar dega, dega hi nahi, kya pata, why would I do like I will lose interest and
[Guest]: I will move on to my next book.
[Guest]: But with the book I have, I always want to sell it because it's my money.
[Guest]: It's my idea.
[Guest]: It's my pitch.
[Guest]: It's my thing.
[Guest]: That makes me very proud.
[Guest]: It comes with my inclinations and my personality.
[Guest]: Maybe there are people who just simply don't want to indulge in these factors.
[Guest]: And for them, the traditional path will always exist.
[Guest]: It doesn't have to be one or the other.
[Guest]: The beauty is that now there are options and options are good for everybody.
[Guest]: Because once serialization starts to work, once independent people explore formats, then
[Guest]: maybe publishers also these the dinosaurs also decide that achcha kuchh naya karte hain
[Guest]: because this has been proven as a working model.
[Guest]: And that becomes good for people who do the traditional route.
[Guest]: Maybe they have more flexibility.
[Guest]: 150,000 words nahi kar paya, chota hi kar rahe hain.
[Guest]: Maybe that works out.
[Guest]: So I feel like it's good times like I think it's it's and it's good to play games.
[Guest]: So I just tell people like you should play games like what is it like don't put such
[Guest]: a high premium on the act of doing something on the written word or the drawing like I'll
[Guest]: only draw if I have my canvas and if I have all my paints no just be open just draw you're
[Amit Varma]: a creative person play the game chatting with a publisher friend of mine who editor at this
[Amit Varma]: large publishing house got a CEO on a call with me because they wanted to kind of think
[Amit Varma]: about the creator economy a little bit and spoke to them for an hour give them a half
[Amit Varma]: an hour presentation and all my thoughts on it and it's very interesting how open they
[Amit Varma]: were and my central point was this that publishers today to move into the new age need to not
[Amit Varma]: think of themselves as producers of this particular kind of package good but need to instead think
[Amit Varma]: of themselves as custodians of creators who possess enormous knowledge enormous insight
[Amit Varma]: and that can find many more outlets today than it could in the past and it doesn't have
[Amit Varma]: to be this 200 page printed book or even a kindle version of that book there are so many
[Amit Varma]: other ways to look at it and my sense is that the publishing industry as we know it today
[Amit Varma]: will not exist 20 years later it will have morphed into something else entirely and some
[Amit Varma]: people will adapt and some people won't so let's see how that goes now speaking of you
[Amit Varma]: know before we come to the end of this I think this is going to be the longest episode on
[Amit Varma]: the show so far so congratulations we are crossing five hours so here's the thing that
[Amit Varma]: we've spoken about how the old model is breaking but it seems to me that a lot of the new model
[Amit Varma]: is on shaky tenuous ground because it is dependent on these massive internet platforms which
[Amit Varma]: are Facebook Instagram Twitter which also have big issues with them which behave in
[Amit Varma]: arbitrary ways and which can make or break creators overnight I know this is something
[Amit Varma]: that you've kind of spoken a lot about feel strongly about can you elaborate a little
[Guest]: bit on this for me so about the nature of the big mega corporations well yeah so I had
[Guest]: a I had a comics Facebook page which had 30,000 fans at one point of time and Facebook decided
[Guest]: that they want my money now so I would post a drawing on it I would post a comic on it
[Guest]: and it shows you how many people have viewed it and the number just plummeted to like 100
[Guest]: if I did well maybe 200 some then it started plummeting to like 50 and lesser numbers like
[Guest]: that so I would pay money into it and it would suddenly reach 10,000 people and the next
[Guest]: day if I post it again and I didn't pay money it was back to 50 people so I quickly realized
[Guest]: that firstly one like they're just extorting me and no matter what I do I can't actually
[Guest]: just succeed anymore and because they know they've got me now they know that I have nowhere
[Guest]: else to go and this sort of thing really it puts my back up you know like I I'm not going
[Guest]: to cooperate anymore so I just I gave up that Facebook page I stopped putting money into
[Guest]: it like just like I lost fans and whatever but what also happened was that I found that
[Guest]: it was a no-win situation because not only are they taking my money and then giving access
[Guest]: to fans but the only way I know who they are giving access to is also them opaque metrics
[Guest]: I have no way of knowing if 10,000 people saw it it's just what Facebook is saying to
[Guest]: me Facebook can say anything its idea it changed its definitions of views to impressions and
[Guest]: it changed the definition of what impressions meant and then it changed how it started counting
[Guest]: videos and it changed who it would show it to and whether they were relevant to it or
[Guest]: not all of these things changed very very very quickly and in arbitrary ways and what
[Guest]: that does is like you feel like you don't know what works you end up chasing after you
[Guest]: know you're trying to chase after a herd you see something that has gone viral and then
[Guest]: you're like and then you try to do that and maybe it works for you maybe it doesn't maybe
[Guest]: it works for you once it doesn't work for you the second time and these are deeply unsettling
[Guest]: things because it completely messes up the momentum and the journey of a creator if they
[Guest]: feel like they need to be someone else tomorrow and they need to be that person again day
[Guest]: after tomorrow and if they take a week then they've lost because the momentum has to stay
[Guest]: and it has to be quick and it has to be funny and it has to be shorter all of these format
[Guest]: changes style changes this changes that changes it's very oppressive and it was just the most
[Guest]: terrible way to do work at that time they still hadn't implemented these policies on
[Guest]: Instagram so Instagram was a super good medium and they had already bought it but they hadn't
[Guest]: done these things and I think 2017 onwards they started messing up Instagram algorithms
[Guest]: as well so I know so many artist friends who have massive followings but they can reach
[Guest]: maybe 10 maybe 10 maybe 10% like if they're very very lucky they reach 10% of their audience
[Guest]: and a large part of the audience is bought accounts and those bots are also allowed to
[Guest]: freely proliferate even when Facebook knows that their bots so you're in this game where
[Guest]: now that they have complete control over the marketplace they're making you jump invisible
[Guest]: hoops to reach an audience that they tell you exists but you have no way of actually
[Guest]: knowing exists and you're creating so much value for their platform but you're not getting
[Guest]: anything for it Instagram exists because photographers put photos really high quality content artists
[Guest]: cartoonists without a second thought they switch to videos let or from now it's deals
[Guest]: they abandoned everybody who made Instagram what it is just overnight it wasn't a journey
[Guest]: we're on it wasn't a weaning away it was just now it's this deal with it I don't like there's
[Guest]: a lot of reasons why it had to be this way audiences are doing this audiences care about
[Guest]: videos but I don't know how like I agree with it and I disagree with it because I don't
[Guest]: know how valid it is to say that when you are the only people that they can get access
[Guest]: to things from if you only do this then of course they can only see this now like for
[Guest]: you to say that this is something that you're getting from the audience is a little unfair
[Guest]: and it's not it's not so easy to make that statement while it may be true so a part of
[Guest]: me says that maybe this is how it is and people need to deal with it I think the next step
[Amit Varma]: that I'd like to see with these platforms is allowing users to choose simple versions
[Amit Varma]: of algorithms like at one level I get that there is a timeline there is limited space
[Amit Varma]: on that timeline and therefore they have the power to determine what goes there and one
[Amit Varma]: day they decide to charge for it on another day like Facebook for example like I post
[Amit Varma]: there because it's not even a very public thing is for friends and family who never
[Amit Varma]: see my post because I don't post a picture I post a link so links to any site automatically
[Amit Varma]: the algorithm ignores which is fine I know what it is it's kind of known to me but what
[Amit Varma]: would be great is is if users can choose what which algorithm they want to decide the content
[Amit Varma]: that goes to them so I if I am an Instagram user and I only want to see reels that's up
[Amit Varma]: to me if I only want to see people I follow that's up to me if I only want to see we'll
[Amit Varma]: stay in my echo chamber that's fine but if I want diversity that's fine and you know
[Guest]: rather than this yeah one mega giving this kind of control back to users is what reddit
[Guest]: does whenever you go to a subreddit you get to choose from so many different characteristics
[Guest]: you want to see what's new you want to see what is the top you want to see things that
[Guest]: are hot right now so then that can be something that is one day old and next to it is something
[Guest]: that is 30 minutes old you get to see things in chronological order you get to see things
[Guest]: that are controversial so they have not been they have almost as many downwards as upwards
[Guest]: you get to sort of customize the algorithm in different ways according to how you want
[Guest]: to do things giving this power to the user is a very big thing and this is something
[Guest]: that these giants don't do because their revenue model is based on controlling the feed and
[Guest]: showing you ads and taking you on this journey that they want to take you on so this giving
[Guest]: power back is something that's antithetical to that idea but this is why it's it's the
[Guest]: reason why people are jaded it's the reason why people keep scrolling it's the reason
[Guest]: why attention is falling and it's also the reason why people are exploring new media
[Guest]: now so podcasts are here because people are not getting conversations in other places
[Guest]: that they want and newsletters because we want to read we want to give it time but simply
[Guest]: the platform doesn't support it and an inbox is still chronological so far yeah yeah a
[Amit Varma]: greater level of personalization maybe by 2030 so you know before we end this effort
[Amit Varma]: you know listeners who are wondering how we got together to record in person Nishant came
[Amit Varma]: all the way from Vancouver to Mumbai just to record with me in my home studio well not
[Amit Varma]: quite he came to India and then he came to Mumbai too and we are having this recording
[Amit Varma]: but I'll end the episode with a standard question I ask all my guests recommend some books for
[Amit Varma]: my listeners and indeed for me like books that shaped you that changed the way you look
[Amit Varma]: at the world or even books that you are so excited about at this moment in time that
[Amit Varma]: you want to stand on a table and scream to the world read this read this please read
[Guest]: right yeah sure fiction has been a big part of my life and I think we do such a disservice
[Guest]: when people say that fiction is less important than non-fiction stories are the most important
[Guest]: things in the world so the latest really cool fiction I read was Ted Chiang's exhalation
[Guest]: those stories and the futurism of his stories actually has wedded me to the idea of certain
[Guest]: inevitable technologies more than any amount of non-fiction newsletters that I would read
[Guest]: advocating or pitching those technologies because once you have a story telling you
[Guest]: something then you can see the world and then things become more concrete so that's a new
[Guest]: thing that I read that I really want to recommend but I think everybody in the world should
[Guest]: read Kurt Vonnegut to be a better human I think everybody should read Slaughterhouse
[Guest]: Five and Cat's Cradle and Sirens of Titan and Breakfast of Champions and all his other
[Guest]: books he's just simply the one of the greatest writers ever we all grew up on British fiction
[Guest]: in India Kurt Vonnegut taught me that you don't have to say very much to punch someone
[Guest]: in the gut or to really just just move them beyond anything else you can do it with one
[Guest]: paragraph with five word sentences another author who did this to me like just unexpectedly
[Guest]: brilliant and insane and crazy was Joseph Heller for Catch-22 and I think everybody
[Guest]: should read Catch-22 because the world is absurd and if this the world of Catch-22 seems
[Guest]: absurd to you then reality is a little bit more absurd than that and some of the greatest
[Guest]: passages that I've ever read in my life are from Catch-22 including there's this one passage
[Guest]: which there's a character called Dunbar he is trying to do boring things and I'm paraphrasing
[Guest]: I'm not quoting at all I'll just tell you what happens is that this other character
[Guest]: is telling him why are you doing these silly boring things and he's saying that I'm trying
[Guest]: to stretch time and he asks him why he's doing that and he says because I'm very old he's
[Guest]: like you're not old you're young like me we're in the air forces they're in the air force
[Guest]: and a second world war so you're not old and he says how much older could I be at my age
[Guest]: every time we fly we are close to death how much older could I be at my age and he tells
[Guest]: him that a long life the only way that he sees to have a long life is to fill it with
[Guest]: boring moments and dull moments so he does dull and boring things and the other guy says
[Guest]: but then in that case why would you want such a life and Dunbar says what else is there
[Guest]: and Joseph Heller in Catch-22 does this to you he he gives you these ideas which just
[Guest]: it take you apart suddenly they just break you down completely and you understand so
[Guest]: much so everybody should read that graphic novels graphic novels are super important
[Guest]: to me I think Alan Moore is one of the greatest people alive and everybody should especially
[Guest]: now everybody should read V for Vendetta it's so important everybody should read Watchmen
[Guest]: it's so important when with our ideas of what heroes are in nonfiction I think I've read
[Guest]: some interesting things this year that I really liked I've always wanted to read philosophy
[Guest]: but I find it very difficult and so I reached out to our writing group and I asked for ideas
[Guest]: for ways that I could read about philosophy without reading the work of philosophers they
[Guest]: recommended at the existentialist cafe by Sarah Bakewell and that was a brilliant brilliant
[Guest]: book and I love it and I tell people to read it the other big book that really mattered
[Guest]: to me and which makes me think about so this idea of the worlds that we were talking about
[Guest]: in Twitter as well comes from Francis Fukuyama's identity and the way that we perceive ourselves
[Guest]: the tribes that we think we belong to and we want to belong to and the idea even of
[Guest]: not belonging to a tribe so even I how I feel like you see yourself like you want to not
[Guest]: associate with tribes and that is also a consequence of of this age giving space to that idea in
[Guest]: our minds and I have felt that for the longest time in my life but that book and I have felt
[Guest]: this way that I don't want to have allegiance to any tribe and I don't want to have any
[Guest]: labels that people can stick on me I am just me but that book allowed me to think about
[Guest]: why other people are in other ways and what are their motivations and incentives and that
[Guest]: was very useful to do what else I love history I love reading about history I read William
[Guest]: Dalrymple's the Anarchy recently that I loved but also Roman history so I read Tom Holland's
[Guest]: Caesar which was the time of the Republic being in danger and becoming a monarchy in
[Guest]: lots of de facto ways and the five Caesars who ruled the family of Caesar that it became
[Guest]: the house of Caesar and how that played out for like 200 years for Rome it has a lot of
[Guest]: lessons for us and it's riveting and fantastic like the kind of things that happened so yeah
[Amit Varma]: that fantastic recommendations in fact speaking of Fukuyama his two-volume book on the evolution
[Amit Varma]: of the state it's just mind-blowing if you haven't read that already but takes a lot
[Amit Varma]: of time to get through so thank you so much you remember Sergei Bubka a little before
[Amit Varma]: your time 1980s pole vaulter won a bunch of Olympic golds oh right yeah so what Bubka
[Amit Varma]: would do is that he broke the world record and then he broke the world record many many
[Amit Varma]: times now the funda was that his sponsors or the Soviet Union or whatever would give
[Amit Varma]: him a bonus every time he broke the world record so he would make sure that he doesn't
[Amit Varma]: break the world record by too much so he can break it again by a little bit so what we
[Amit Varma]: have done is we have broken the world record for the longest scene unseen episode and we
[Amit Varma]: could easily talk for another five hours but I'm thinking that you know want to have another
[Amit Varma]: yeah let me otherwise it'll be very hard for me to do a 10-hour episode with someone else
[Amit Varma]: so you know let me have the satisfaction of making this at some point as well so thank
[Guest]: you so much for being so patient thank you for having me like I wanted to tell you at
[Guest]: the start what you've done is a very terrible thing that it took me half a decade to get
[Guest]: over my imposter syndrome and just by inviting me to this podcast you have brought it roaring
[Guest]: back I'm going to have to deal with the ramifications of that for several months it should be the
[Amit Varma]: other way around and I think we're both at that stage when this should not matter but
[Amit Varma]: having said goodbye to you I'll also end it with what will be a treat for my listeners
[Amit Varma]: as well one of your favorite writers reading one of your favorite poems here's Charles
[Unknown]: Bukowski with bluebird there's a bluebird in my heart that wants to get out but I'm
[Unknown]: too tough for him I say stay in there I'm not going to let anybody see you there's a
[Unknown]: bluebird in my heart that wants to get out but I pour whiskey on him and inhale cigarette
[Unknown]: smoke and the whores and the bartenders and the grocery clerks never know that he's in
[Unknown]: there there's a bluebird in my heart that wants to get out but I'm too tough for him
[Unknown]: I say stay down do you want to mess me up do you want to screw up the works you want
[Unknown]: to blow my book sales in Europe there's a bluebird in my heart that wants to get out
[Unknown]: but I'm too clever I only let him out at night sometimes when everybody's asleep I say I
[Unknown]: know you're there so don't be sad then I put him back but he's singing a little in there
[Unknown]: I haven't quite let him die and we sleep together like that with our secret pact and it's nice
[Unknown]: enough to make a man weep but I don't weep do you
[Amit Varma]: if you enjoyed listening to this episode head on over to the show notes enter rabbit holes
[Amit Varma]: at will all of Nishant's work is linked from there you can follow Nishant on twitter at
[Amit Varma]: sneaky art you can follow me at Amit Verma A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A you can browse past episodes
[Amit Varma]: of the scene in the unseen at seen unseen.in thank you for listening.